nãnã ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
óra NOUN 0 root
wɨy VERB 4 compound
maŋaptem ADJ 4 advmod

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
yét PRON 3 nmod
péŋ NOUN 4 nsubj
[ʔet] AUX 0 root

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
át NOUN 1 obl
mãm PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 1 advmod
iket VERB 0 root

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
et PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
nakõy VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
Naʔkɨt PROPN 3 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

kõm ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
mãygãra NOUN 4 nsubj
etóp VERB 0 root

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
yegat VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 2 advmod
tẽna ADV 2 advmod

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 4 obj
tap PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
cúrem ADV 4 advmod

owekuy NOUN 0 root
nãn AUX 1 aux
iʔkɨy PART 1 discourse
tə PART 1 discourse

yaw NOUN 0 root
gõam ADV 1 advmod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋorér NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root

aʔpábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop

owẽ NOUN 2 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 3 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

tocitóga VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

kopət NOUN 0 root
to PART 1 clf
wecéb ADJ 1 amod
aʔmãn AUX 1 cop

kɨgomət PRON 2 det
ip NOUN 3 nsubj
pay VERB 0 root

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
tokõna ADP 3 mark
icɨ NOUN 4 obj
an VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
aʔkəy ADP 4 obl

õn PRON 3 nsubj
owirap NOUN 3 obj
tɨn VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 dep
co PART 3 dep

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
topə PART 0 root
toat PRON 4 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 2 obj
nõ ADV 4 nmod
wĩn VERB 2 ccomp

tabat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

óra NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

aʔken VERB 0 root
pə PART 1 discourse
coke PART 1 discourse

eken VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
co PART 1 dep
battem ADJ 1 advmod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 obj
tati VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ŋato VERB 3 dep
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
wa AUX 5 aux

at PRON 3 nsubj
topə PART 3 mark
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root

ar PRON 4 nsubj
wayo NOUN 4 obj
gap ADJ 2 amod
ʔot VERB 0 root

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
[ocaʔyõk VERB 1 dep
nãt SCONJ 2 mark
wa] AUX 2 aux

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
oturum VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

kiganape ADV 4 advmod
ap AUX 4 aux
naʔto NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 4 advmod

aʔwɑ̃ŋ VERB 0 root
naʔto NOUN 3 obj
wīn VERB 1 dep

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yar PART 2 mark
iʔke PART 2 advmod

wayo NOUN 2 compound
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 2 clf
cára ADJ 2 amod
beʔ ADJ 2 clf

icãp NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

weriweri VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
cahwíptem ADJ 1 advmod

pattem ADV 4 advmod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
web AUX 4 aux
okera VERB 0 root

tɨk VERB 2 compound
tɨk VERB 7 parataxis
at AUX 2 aux
toat PRON 5 nmod
wirik NOUN 7 obj
kanã ADV 5 advmod
təga VERB 0 root
tə PART 7 mark

mãygãra NOUN 2 obj
wĩa VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
[war PRON 5 nmod
owẽ] NOUN 2 nsubj
gay AUX 2 aux

owaraʔkət VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
omãmnoy VERB 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
abeʔnoy VERB 0 root

mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 2 nsubj
imatẽran VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 advmod
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

aʔcey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
yat PART 1 mark

õn PRON 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
yati VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop
iʔke PART 3 clf

ĩya NOUN 0 root
ʔip ADJ 1 clf
par ADJ 1 amod
ip ADJ 1 clf

ar PRON 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
pattem ADJ 1 parataxis

owakán VERB 0 root
matet ADV 1 advmod
wat PRON 4 nmod
iyõm NOUN 1 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

mõm VERB 0 root
ʔat AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obl

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
bat ADJ 1 amod
yet AUX 4 aux
opɨya VERB 0 root

yate NOUN 2 nmod
naʔcəg NOUN 0 root
wew ADJ 2 amod

wayo NOUN 2 compound
naká NOUN 0 root
bap PART 1 clf

aʔken VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
apəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
pepat VERB 0 root
cək ADV 4 advmod
mãm PART 4 discourse

ameko NOUN 3 nsubj
cú ADJ 1 amod
yaʔwa VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 mark

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 3 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
[ewpaka VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

mani NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
aʔkera VERB 1 conj
kanãp SCONJ 1 mark

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 2 amod

naʔwəy NOUN 2 nmod
bía NOUN 0 root

otoyrem VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 4 nsubj
aʔwĩa VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 4 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop

oken VERB 0 root
péŋ NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 case
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
ʔaʔ PART 4 clf
peʔ ADP 4 case

yét PRON 2 nmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 obj
bat ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 4 appos

iyã NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
púŋ VERB 1 dep
ye AUX 3 aux

okera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
okay AUX 1 aux

cutcut VERB 0 root
ʔet AUX 1 aux
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ŋakəy PRON 1 obj

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root

[mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
õn PRON 4 nsubj
itop VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 3 advmod
ar PRON 3 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 3 advmod

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ya SCONJ 5 mark
[amãn NOUN 5 nsubj
yat] VERB 1 dep

ɨu NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root
kãp ADJ 3 amod
pap ADJ 3 clf

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
igã PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
peʔnɨy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtigat VERB 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 mark
iʔke PART 1 advmod

mãygãra NOUN 2 obj
wĩa VERB 5 xcomp
wat PRON 4 nmod
owẽ NOUN 5 nsubj
kay AUX 0 root

oyaʔwara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux
aʔtoy VERB 1 xcomp
iga PART 3 discourse

taykit PART 2 advmod
eyamoy VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark

oyãn VERB 0 root
mẽganape ADV 1 advmod
mĩn ADV 1 obl

karamnoʔ NOUN 0 root

karo NOUN 2 compound
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 2 clf
pĩg ADJ 2 amod
aʔ ADJ 2 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 3 discourse
cokcok VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

war PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 3 obj
ʔet AUX 0 root
okəy ADP 3 case
matet ADV 3 obl

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
icɨ NOUN 0 root

icey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 mark

cawap NOUN 2 nsubj
wɨy VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
igã PART 3 mark

tpu VERB 0 root
ameko NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 aux
aʔkɨga VERB 1 conj

taptoba VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 1 appos

mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 1 aux
[péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
manẽ ADJ 3 amod
ya VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 5 mark

enaká NOUN 0 root

ekap NOUN 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
pekey VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 1 clf

kanɑ̃y ADV 4 advmod
abagon NOUN 4 nsubj
nap PART 2 case
waʔye AUX 0 root

kõm ADV 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
nyahmãm PART 3 advmod
apik ADP 3 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
amaken VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
[aʔwéro VERB 3 obj
toy] VERB 0 root

et PRON 2 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

tenaʔwara VERB 0 root
reʔkay AUX 1 aux

móa NOUN 4 obj
rokõna ADP 4 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ibeʔtɨn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔ=rati VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 4 advmod
iʔkay AUX 4 aux
Kabirera PROPN 4 obj
wĩa VERB 0 root
iʔkõna PART 4 nsubj

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
makãri NOUN 4 obj
rakət VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
(...) PUNCT 3 punct

makap NOUN 0 root
kap ADJ 1 clf

Noep PROPN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 1 clf

paʔpiktem ADJ 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
war PRON 4 nmod
owẽ NOUN 1 nsubj
rap PART 4 case

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root
paʔpik ADJ 3 amod
kap ADJ 3 clf

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ekera VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
ahyə PART 4 mark

aʔan VERB 0 root

opábe NOUN 3 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod
cigá NOUN 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 3 obl
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod

maʔpəy NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
ʔĩttem ADV 2 advmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ PART 3 clf

maŋaptem ADJ 3 advmod
ŋaap AUX 3 aux
otoba VERB 0 root

kaʔmep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

tap PRON 2 nsubj
toroyapít VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
amãn NOUN 3 nsubj
ara VERB 4 dep
gotoy VERB 0 root

owẽ NOUN 2 compound
gun NOUN 0 root

kaʔto PRON 4 nsubj
karowéya VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop

maʔta NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
[towéya VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yat PART 2 mark
iʔke PART 2 advmod
pattem ADV 2 advmod

kɨrɨwep NOUN 2 compound
tem NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 0 root
rab PART 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod

toto NOUN 2 nsubj
ibetõ VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 2 advmod
mãm PART 2 discourse
ŋán PART 2 dep

karokérara VERB 0 root

púŋ NOUN 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
okay AUX 1 aux
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔpap ADJ 3 xcomp
toy VERB 0 root

iyãy NOUN 0 root
gõm ADP 1 case

õn PRON 5 nsubj
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
toy VERB 0 root

abaraʔkət VERB 0 root

át NOUN 3 obl
mãm PART 3 discourse
oyaʔwarap VERB 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ekəy ADP 1 obl

nãm NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

cúrem ADJ 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 3 advmod
ahyə PART 3 mark
ekerap VERB 0 root

iʔca NOUN 2 nmod
macahmərəba VERB 0 root
rokõna ADP 2 mark

[õn PRON 0 root
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
at PRON 4 nsubj
icapé VERB 1 ccomp

məy ADV 4 advmod
aʔwaʔye AUX 4 aux
totia VERB 4 dep
oyuruŋ VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 4 aux

pattem ADJ 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
õn PRON 1 nsubj

pagon NUM 3 nummod
nóptem X 3 dep
nakõm NOUN 0 root
nap PART 3 nmod
tə PART 3 discourse

ipá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

at PRON 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
paʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod
mɨy ADV 3 advmod
mãm PART 3 discourse

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

were NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
iket VERB 1 dep

iyõm NOUN 2 nsubj
ŋen VERB 0 root
co PART 2 dep
matet ADV 2 obl

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

iyõm NOUN 2 nsubj
ikap AUX 0 root
towenaoba VERB 2 xcomp
co PART 3 dep

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 2 amod

matet ADV 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
rokõna ADP 1 mark
Petĩp PROPN 6 nsubj
ʔep AUX 6 aux
towetõa VERB 1 dep

taykit PART 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ekɨga VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
manikap NOUN 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 mark

naʔyoh NOUN 0 root
nõ ADV 1 advmod

owicorop ADJ 2 xcomp
ken VERB 0 root

wəŋnem ADJ 4 advmod
mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 4 aux
iʔpéya VERB 0 root

taykit PART 3 advmod
aʔi NOUN 3 nsubj
bekɨga VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf

wayo NOUN 4 obj
gap ADJ 1 amod
ar PRON 4 nsubj
iʔop VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
ip NOUN 4 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
owihmãm ADP 4 obl

ẽn PRON 3 nsubj
yaw NOUN 3 obj
rati VERB 0 root

abakán VERB 0 root
aʔpap ADJ 1 amod
kəy ADP 1 case

oyaʔkoy VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 5 obj
bat ADJ 1 amod
tokõna ADP 5 case
at PRON 5 nsubj
ipɨy VERB 0 root

kɨrɨwep NOUN 0 root
pát ADJ 1 amod

naʔyop NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 0 root
mecéb ADJ 1 amod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔmãn AUX 1 cop

tẽna ADV 5 advmod
iʔke PART 5 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 5 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 5 obj
arap VERB 0 root

abebeʔtɨra VERB 0 root

kaʔto PRON 2 nsubj
karorocapét VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 2 mark

iʔtə PRON 5 nsubj
maʔpəy NOUN 4 nmod
ŋa PRON 2 clf
cet NOUN 5 obj
maʔã VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 5 advmod
nãnin PART 5 mark

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
pewit NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 3 punct
ŋaat PRON 6 nmod
pewit NOUN 3 appos
koãm PART 6 mark

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 case

pattem ADJ 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ap AUX 1 cop
towerowɨya VERB 1 dep

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 1 discourse
igã PART 1 discourse

cego NOUN 0 root
bɨk ADJ 1 compound
kãp ADJ 1 amod

ipá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

naʔto NOUN 5 obj
cú ADJ 1 amod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
at PRON 5 nsubj
iwĩ VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
aket PART 2 discourse

cãn NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
aʔkɨrɨk ADJ 3 obj
ʔan VERB 0 root

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
tanogat VERB 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wet AUX 1 aux

Antônio PROPN 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 3 clf
naʔot ADV 3 advmod
peʔ ADP 5 case

owakán VERB 0 root
aʔkəy PRON 1 obl

icagá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

ŋaʔóa VERB 0 root

maʔteg NOUN 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

ite NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 5 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

[oken VERB 0 root
nãt] SCONJ 1 mark
ocaʔyõga VERB 1 dep

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
owin VERB 0 root
[owəy VERB 2 dep
nã AUX 3 cop
nãt SCONJ 3 mark
toʔwa] AUX 3 aux

karoat PRON 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
tẽna ADV 2 advmod

pecéptem ADJ 2 advmod
aʔtarap ADJ 0 root

ameko NOUN 2 nmod
ʔora NOUN 0 root

owaʔpan VERB 0 root
aʔpẽya VERB 1 xcomp
gán PART 1 dep

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
para ADJ 1 amod
ŋa PRON 1 clf

õn PRON 4 nsubj
púŋ VERB 4 obl
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 aux

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 advmod

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
matet ADV 2 obl

taykir PART 3 advmod
iʔwirup NOUN 3 obj
toba VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
an VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 3 advmod
rẽna ADV 3 advmod

at AUX 0 root

aʔcot NOUN 0 root
tap PART 1 case

aʔtoba VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
cúrem ADV 1 advmod
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse
memã PART 2 discourse

cúrem ADJ 0 root
wat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔa ADJ 3 clf

kɨgope ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekap AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

kaʔa NOUN 5 obl
ʔa ADJ 1 clf
peʔ ADP 1 case
ap AUX 5 aux
kãykãy VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 5 aux

ar PRON 3 nsubj
inãw NOUN 3 obj
rati VERB 0 root

məy ADV 6 advmod
péŋ NOUN 6 nsubj
ʔet AUX 6 aux
kohmãy NOUN 6 obl
ʔerem ADP 6 case
tokəga VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 3 dep
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

oken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
nyar PART 1 dep
aʔtoy VERB 1 xcomp
iga PART 1 dep

taykit PART 2 advmod
ebiaʔan VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark
mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 2 obl
kəy ADP 4 case

owirup NOUN 2 nsubj
tẽy VERB 0 root
kokəy ADP 2 obl
okap AUX 2 aux
ocagəpto NOUN 6 obj
cára VERB 2 xcomp
koãm ADV 6 advmod

mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
imaterãn VERB 1 acl
nãnin PART 3 advmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtigat VERB 0 root

[õn PRON 4 nsubj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
iʔkap AUX 3 aux
aʔwĩa VERB 0 root

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf
kĩn ADJ 1 amod
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse

ekera VERB 0 root

ewét VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

abakán VERB 0 root
ekəy PRON 1 obl

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nakira NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
[yét] PRON 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 4 aux
tocaropaba VERB 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 compound
naká NOUN 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
tágɨh NOUN 2 obl
mã ADP 3 case

at PRON 3 nsubj
ahyə PART 3 dep
úeúe VERB 0 root
ye AUX 3 aux

karo NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

ip NOUN 2 obj
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 2 aux
yahmãm PART 2 advmod

[ar PRON 2 nsubj
otoy] VERB 5 dep
ye SCONJ 5 mark
wer AUX 5 aux
oweʔcɨra VERB 0 root

owɨya VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
coke PART 2 discourse

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nsubj
ameko NOUN 3 obj
roy VERB 0 root

wawwaw NOUN 2 nsubj
bay VERB 5 dep
ye SCONJ 5 mark
ŋaʔet AUX 5 aux
toyaʔwara VERB 0 root

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
cú ADJ 2 amod
wĩn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 3 advmod
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

wat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

iyá NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

wayo NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf

[ẽn PRON 0 root
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
icát VERB 1 ccomp

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

karo NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod
matet ADV 3 obl

opía NOUN 0 root

aʔtoba VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 1 advmod
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔpẽn VERB 0 root

páro NOUN 0 root
pɨy ADJ 1 compound

naʔcap NOUN 0 root
yatep ADJ 1 amod

inãw NOUN 2 obj
beʔnogat VERB 0 root

abeʔcɨn VERB 0 root
[noorawa VERB 1 dep
nãt SCONJ 2 mark
toʔwa AUX 2 aux
rawrem] ADJ 2 advmod

nãn AUX 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wīn VERB 0 root

owirup NOUN 2 obj
tɨra VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 2 appos

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
iwĩm VERB 1 acl
ahyə PART 1 mark

wayo NOUN 2 compound
nak NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 2 clf
cú ADJ 2 amod
bap ADJ 2 clf

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
yat PART 2 mark

oweʔŋət VERB 0 root

yét PRON 2 det
maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root

acagá NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔyamón VERB 0 root

karam NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

karam NOUN 2 compound
nãk NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf
ʔĩt ADJ 2 amod
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

owakán VERB 0 root
omãmkəy ADP 1 obl

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

oweʔŋen VERB 0 root

karo NOUN 2 nmod
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root
mãm PART 2 discourse
at PRON 6 nsubj
towirap NOUN 6 obj
ʔo VERB 2 dep
kanãp SCONJ 6 mark

agóaʔpər NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
Cabirera PROPN 1 obl
kõm ADP 4 case

uéué VERB 0 root
we AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 discourse

oweʔcɨn VERB 0 root
[at PRON 3 nsubj
oto VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

owagon PRON 2 nsubj
oyakay VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
béŋ NOUN 4 obj
noy VERB 1 dep

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

oken VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 1 advmod

kãram NOUN 2 obj
meʔnẽy VERB 0 root

okennem VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux

muturum VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

inãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

cárarem ADJ 0 root
õn PRON 1 nsubj

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
paʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod

wéy VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
tágɨp NOUN 1 obj
peʔ ADP 3 case

matet ADV 0 root
kokoãm PART 1 mark
ocagəptoʔ NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 aux
toyawɨga VERB 1 dep

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 3 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 4 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
manikap NOUN 3 obj
peya VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 3 appos

õn PRON 2 nsubj
emaberopit VERB 0 root
ŋakəy PRON 2 obj

ĩya NOUN 2 nsubj
tẽy VERB 0 root

opábeʔ NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 1 punct
epábeʔ NOUN 1 conj
koãm PART 3 mark

õn PRON 3 nsubj
yaracewag NOUN 3 obj
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark
manã PART 2 advmod

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
õn PART 5 nsubj
itop VERB 3 ccomp

aʔtóy VERB 0 root

et PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
at PRON 2 nsubj
epɨyap VERB 2 parataxis

tokera VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
igã PART 1 discourse

makap NOUN 0 root
kap ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
gap ADJ 1 clf

Kokõ PROPN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

aʔkun NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 4 nmod
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
pɨk=toʔ NOUN 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
epɨy VERB 0 root
et PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 4 clf
peʔ PART 4 case

ei NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

karam NOUN 2 nmod
wirap NOUN 0 root

tuŋnoʔ NOUN 0 root

er PRON 2 nmod
icɨ NOUN 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
towirup NOUN 3 obj
ʔot VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 3 advmod

ameko NOUN 3 nsubj
cú ADJ 1 amod
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
nyat PART 3 mark
iʔke PART 3 advmod

ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ahyə PART 5 discourse
menə PART 5 discourse
kanã NOUN 5 nmod
tayãn VERB 0 root
menə PART 5 discourse

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 3 nsubj
orakət VERB 0 root

nãn AUX 3 nsubj
ikap AUX 3 aux
púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

ŋa PRON 2 nsubj
oʔtoy VERB 0 root
maŋaptem ADJ 2 advmod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ameko NOUN 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

et PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 3 nsubj
emakət VERB 0 root

inãk NOUN 0 root
ká ADJ 1 clf
becép ADJ 1 amod
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
[agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
aʔwĩ VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 4 mark

piro NOUN 0 root

maʔwit NOUN 4 nsubj
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
wɨy VERB 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf

aʔken VERB 0 root

məy ADV 2 advmod
mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 2 aux
yét PRON 6 det
kanã ADV 6 advmod
cit NOUN 7 obj
toba VERB 2 conj

itɨ NOUN 0 root
op ADJ 1 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod

tĩŋ NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋət VERB 0 root

aʔwak ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔet AUX 2 aux

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
pə PART 2 advmod

mĩm ADV 5 obl
mãm PART 5 discourse
iʔke PART 1 advmod
péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
yowarap VERB 0 root

towagon NOUN 0 root
gəy PART 1 case

at PRON 5 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔaʔ NOUN 5 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 3 clf
pẽn VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 5 advmod
co PART 5 dep
iʔyat PRON 5 nsubj
ip NOUN 5 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 5 discourse
menə PART 5 discourse

iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
awe NOUN 4 obj
capét VERB 0 root

wəwə NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

to=kera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 ccomp

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nsubj
yét PRON 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

iyãy NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

iyõm NOUN 0 root
ŋõm ADP 1 case

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
awe NOUN 4 nsubj
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
capét VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 0 root
et PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 1 nsubj
rap PART 3 case

ip NOUN 3 nsubj
cú ADJ 1 amod
gət VERB 0 root
icɨ NOUN 3 obl
bət ADP 4 case

wat PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 5 obj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
õn PRON 5 nsubj
ibɨyap VERB 0 root

cán NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

[ar PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 6 nsubj
rab PART 2 case
iʔke] PART 2 advmod
ewirup NOUN 6 obj
ʔot VERB 0 root

oken VERB 0 root

ci NOUN 2 compound
mininĩ NOUN 5 obj
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
mõm ADV 2 advmod
mawɨya VERB 0 root

were NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

ewɨya VERB 0 root

əg VERB 2 nsubj
inaʔwara VERB 0 root
aʔpik ADP 2 obl

iyã NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

tokera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
maʔwɨt NOUN 1 nsubj
cú ADJ 3 amod
gay AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 3 nsubj
cĩm NOUN 3 obj
yegat VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 mark
co PART 3 dep

nãn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 discourse

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 3 mark

karo NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf
par ADJ 1 amod
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

eken VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 7 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 7 aux
at PRON 5 nmod
chapéu NOUN 7 obj
káʔ ADJ 5 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
menə PART 7 mark

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
cára VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
aʔkay AUX 2 aux

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

naʔwəy NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔi VERB 0 root
maʔɨp NOUN 2 obl
ʔay ADP 3 case

iu NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root

ipá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 0 root
tə PART 1 discourse

icap NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cára ADJ 1 amod
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

wayo NOUN 3 nmod
bah ADJ 1 clf
yu NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
pattem ADJ 2 advmod

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
karoʔwa AUX 1 aux

nãn PRON 4 obl
mihmãm ADP 1 case
ekab AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
ĩya NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
kokõ NOUN 5 obj
wĩa VERB 3 conj
kõam PART 5 mark

kaʔmep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
(aʔkəy) ADP 1 obj

maʔpəy NOUN 6 nsubj
rap PART 1 case
pat ADJ 1 amod
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
awe NOUN 3 nsubj
orabitẽy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
omẽn NOUN 3 obj
meropir VERB 0 root
yar PART 3 dep
iʔke PART 3 advmod

abeʔnan VERB 0 root

cokcok VERB 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔet AUX 2 aux
yat PART 2 discourse
iʔke PART 2 advmod

aʔwĩa VERB 0 root
púŋ VERB 1 obl
ʔa AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔyamón VERB 0 root

naʔwəy NOUN 2 obj
beʔŋət VERB 0 root

boi NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
towaʔpara VERB 0 root
towewĩa VERB 3 conj

tuytuy VERB 6 obl
Babesáya PROPN 6 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 6 aux
yate NOUN 6 obj
taʔwara VERB 0 root

ip NOUN 0 root
cahyoy NOUN 1 compound
kɨt ADJ 1 amod

kɨganape ADV 3 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekerap VERB 0 root

taraptem ADV 2 advmod
õn PRON 0 root
okõna ADP 2 case

abeʔŋət VERB 0 root

oyãy NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

toyãy NOUN 4 obj
ʔa ADJ 1 clf
binõ NOUN 1 compound
ya VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔpɨy VERB 0 root
gahmõmnem ADV 2 advmod

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
ʔoa VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux
cak ADV 2 obl
mam X 2 dep

ŋabenaoy VERB 0 root
abihmãm ADP 1 obl

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

ewét VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

aʔken VERB 0 root
pə PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

[at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 4 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
nãt] SCONJ 4 mark
totia VERB 4 dep

tik NOUN 2 nsubj
wán VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 2 mark
et PRON 5 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 5 clf
peʔ ADP 5 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

ŋaken VERB 4 dep
yəye SCONJ 1 mark
wer AUX 4 aux
oyaʔwara VERB 0 root

aʔwero NOUN 2 obj
toba VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux

pecéptem ADJ 2 advmod
ʔep AUX 0 root
mĩn ADV 2 advmod

koran NOUN 0 root
map ADJ 1 nmod

opá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

wáya NOUN 0 root
ʔɨp ADJ 1 clf

cibekonnoʔ NOUN 0 root

iʔat PRON 5 nsubj
yaʔmo NOUN 3 compound
ci NOUN 5 obj
káʔ ADJ 3 clf
ʔor VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 5 advmod
werem ADV 5 obl
ŋán PART 7 dep

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
menə PART 3 mark

wayo NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
bap ADJ 1 clf

apəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 4 aux
topaba VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 4 advmod
mãm PART 4 discourse

caʔwət NOUN 0 root
pab ADJ 1 clf
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

Petɨp PROPN 2 nsubj
petõn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
matet ADV 2 obl

ocorah NOUN 2 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

at PRON 5 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 3 clf
pẽ VERB 0 root
mãm PART 5 discourse

péŋ NOUN 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
itop VERB 1 acl

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
amagahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop

at PRON 2 nsubj
amati VERB 0 root

toat PRON 2 nmod
páy ADJ 0 root
gəy PART 2 case
roʔwa AUX 2 aux

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 3 ccomp
menə PART 0 root
aket PART 3 discourse

ŋa PRON 2 nsubj
omacopɨn VERB 0 root

tuy VERB 6 obl
Babesáya PROPN 6 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 6 aux
yate NOUN 6 obj
taʔwara VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
ip NOUN 3 nmod
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
kanã PART 3 dep

ocãp NOUN 0 root

aʔwero NOUN 2 dep
wɨy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
battem ADJ 2 advmod

oyakõy VERB 0 root
bãttem ADV 1 advmod

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
ŋapik PRON 2 obl

cúrem ADV 2 advmod
at PRON 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 mark
matet ADV 4 obl

ʔiriŋ NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

cego NOUN 0 root
bɨk ADJ 1 compound

nãn AUX 3 obl
bihmãm ADP 1 case
ekerap VERB 0 root

aʔ=ken VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 2 clf

péŋ NOUN 0 root
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop

õn PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
təgana ADV 3 obl
peʔ ADP 3 case

ĩya NOUN 0 root
ʔɨp ADJ 1 clf

ebeʔcɨn VERB 0 root
wat PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
eto VERB 1 dep
nãr SCONJ 4 mark
a AUX 4 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
opit VERB 0 root
məy ADV 2 advmod
mãm PART 2 discourse
co PART 2 dep
kán PART 2 dep

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
tə PART 1 mark

opá NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

kɨganapət ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
at PRON 4 nsubj
etop VERB 0 root

iyõm NOUN 0 root
mãt ADJ 1 amod

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
iʔkɨy PART 0 root
aʔwĩa VERB 2 xcomp
wet AUX 2 aux

cób NOUN 2 obj
mawɨya VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
naʔwəyroʔ NOUN 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obj

ekəy ADP 4 obl
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wep AUX 4 aux
owakára VERB 0 root

naco NOUN 5 obl
ʔerem ADP 1 case
ye AUX 5 aux
kanãp SCONJ 5 mark
iʔkəga VERB 0 root

iyá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

inakároʔ NOUN 0 root

nãn AUX 3 obj
ẽn PRON 3 nsubj
itop VERB 0 root

inãwroʔ NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
abeʔmẽn VERB 0 root

ʔittem ADJ 3 advmod
õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root

maʔwɨr NOUN 0 root
yet AUX 1 aux
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 1 xcomp

aʔwét VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 1 case

[yét PRON 2 det
péŋ] NOUN 3 nsubj
paʔpan VERB 0 root

cicɨ NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 3 case

maʔẽ NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

tomanẽ NOUN 2 nmod
mãŋa VERB 0 root
tə PART 2 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ĩriŋ NOUN 3 obj
macéri VERB 0 root
gán PART 3 dep

taykir PART 3 advmod
at PRON 3 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
iga PART 3 mark

péŋ NOUN 6 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
topə PART 0 root
toat PRON 5 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 6 obj
wĩa VERB 3 ccomp

mɨy ADV 3 amod
mãm PART 1 discourse
péŋ NOUN 0 root
ʔep AUX 3 aux
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
raken VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj

Júnior PROPN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 nmod
pa VERB 4 obj
gotoy VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

karokéran VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
uéué VERB 2 dep
kanãp ADV 2 advmod

itɨ NOUN 0 root
op ADJ 1 compound

oken VERB 0 root
kãy VERB 3 obj
kãy VERB 1 obj
kanãp ADV 1 advmod

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 6 obl
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
web AUX 6 aux
aʔpɨya VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
ibaʔpat VERB 0 root

ŋaramãya VERB 0 root

wenwen VERB 0 root
we AUX 1 aux
mãm PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 2 nsubj
ŋabean VERB 0 root
ya SCONJ 5 mark
ŋa PRON 5 nsubj
oyaʔti VERB 2 dep
nãn AUX 5 cop

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
cĩm NOUN 4 obj
nati VERB 0 root
aʔcá VERB 4 xcomp
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
toʔwa AUX 5 aux

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
capóp NOUN 1 nmod
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aʔ=to VERB 2 advcl
kanãp SCONJ 3 mark

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root
wɨn ADJ 3 amod
map ADJ 3 clf

karam NOUN 2 obj
natia VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

amãn NOUN 4 nsubj
yat PART 4 mark
nãnin PART 4 discourse
tə PART 0 root

kanãy ADV 6 advmod
at PRON 6 nsubj
toat PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 6 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 4 clf
pẽya VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
wep AUX 7 aux
aʔtoba VERB 2 ccomp

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
tomãmwĩn VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yat PART 2 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
amabaraʔkət VERB 0 root

yate NOUN 2 nmod
gap NOUN 0 root

kɨgomət PRON 2 det
ĩya NOUN 4 obj
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
iwĩ VERB 0 root

iʔnõ PRON 0 root
gəy ADP 1 case
rə PART 1 mark

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

aʔken VERB 0 root
iʔkɨy PART 1 parataxis

məy ADV 4 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
waʔye AUX 0 root

mekõm ADP 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
iʔyat PRON 1 nsubj
kotigap VERB 1 acl
mɨy ADV 4 advmod
mãm PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 2 nsubj
epɨy VERB 0 root
co PART 2 dep

kaptem ADJ 0 root
at PRON 1 nsubj
ahyə PART 1 mark

tokera VERB 0 root
[maʔwɨt NOUN 1 nsubj
cú] ADJ 2 amod
kay AUX 1 aux

ci NOUN 3 nmod
baʔpe NOUN 3 obj
mawɨga VERB 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
co PART 1 dep

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
rah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

õn PRON 5 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
ʔa ADJ 3 clf
kət VERB 0 root
cagáro NUM 3 nummod
kõmnem X 5 dep

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
aʔpap ADJ 4 amod
ʔet AUX 4 aux
towecɨra VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
kət VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
iʔke PART 4 advmod
menə PART 4 mark

iʔtə PRON 0 root
rap PART 1 case

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
pat ADJ 1 amod
ŋanãn AUX 1 cop

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
ragahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop

karam NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔɨp NOUN 0 root
cakot ADJ 1 amod

parato NOUN 2 nmod
cək NOUN 0 root

teʔyoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
tawrem ADJ 1 advmod

cagáro NOUN 0 root
mərəp ADJ 1 compound

mẽt ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

cãn NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋen VERB 0 root

aʔwɨy VERB 0 root
yat PART 1 mark
iʔke PART 1 advmod

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

paramu VERB 0 root
ʔa AUX 1 aux
owikop ADP 1 obl

onakɨra NOUN 2 compound
cop NOUN 0 root