were NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔɨp NOUN 0 root
cakot ADJ 1 amod

ekap NOUN 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 3 obl
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod

kõm ADV 3 advmod
ar PRON 3 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 3 advmod

[ẽn PRON 0 root
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
icát VERB 1 ccomp

owirup NOUN 2 nsubj
tẽy VERB 0 root
kokəy ADP 2 obl
okap AUX 2 aux
ocagəpto NOUN 6 obj
cára VERB 2 xcomp
koãm ADV 6 advmod

karamnoʔ NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
naʔwəyroʔ NOUN 0 root

aʔi NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 3 discourse
cokcok VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
[ocaʔyõk VERB 1 dep
nãt SCONJ 2 mark
wa] AUX 2 aux

maʔta NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf
kap ADJ 1 amod
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
co PART 1 dep

nãn AUX 3 nsubj
ikap AUX 3 aux
púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

tẽna ADV 5 advmod
iʔke PART 5 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 5 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 5 obj
arap VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
coke PART 2 discourse

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
tokõna ADP 3 mark
icɨ NOUN 4 obj
an VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
aʔkəy ADP 4 obl

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root

yep VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux

ewɨya VERB 0 root

abegahmõm VERB 0 root
nã AUX 1 cop

kanãy ADV 6 advmod
at PRON 6 nsubj
toat PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 6 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 4 clf
pẽya VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
owin VERB 0 root
[owəy VERB 2 dep
nã AUX 3 cop
nãt SCONJ 3 mark
toʔwa] AUX 3 aux

ci NOUN 2 nmod
baʔpe NOUN 5 obl
bem ADP 2 case
wep AUX 5 aux
owaraʔkəga VERB 0 root

Petɨp PROPN 2 nsubj
petõn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
matet ADV 2 obl

oyakõy VERB 0 root
bãttem ADV 1 advmod

kõm ADV 5 advmod
co PART 5 dep
iʔyat PRON 5 nsubj
ip NOUN 5 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 5 discourse
menə PART 5 discourse

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
iʔkap AUX 3 aux
aʔwĩa VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse
nãnin PART 2 discourse

karowɨya VERB 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
matet ADV 1 advmod
wat PRON 4 nmod
iyõm NOUN 1 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

karo NOUN 2 nmod
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
aʔkɨrɨk ADJ 3 obj
ʔan VERB 0 root

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
et PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
nakõy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
púŋ VERB 4 obl
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 aux

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 mark
igã PART 2 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark
manã PART 2 advmod

at PRON 5 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔaʔ NOUN 5 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 3 clf
pẽn VERB 0 root

aʔtoba VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
cúrem ADV 1 advmod
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
pewit NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 3 punct
ŋaat PRON 6 nmod
pewit NOUN 3 appos
koãm PART 6 mark

taykir PART 3 advmod
iʔwirup NOUN 3 obj
toba VERB 0 root

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
iket VERB 1 dep

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 1 clf

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
át NOUN 1 obl
mãm PART 1 discourse

karokéran VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

opábe NOUN 3 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod
cigá NOUN 0 root

péŋ NOUN 0 root
tə PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 5 nsubj
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
toy VERB 0 root

wayo NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
bap ADJ 1 clf

ʔiriŋ NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

iyõm NOUN 0 root
ŋõm ADP 1 case

taptoba VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 1 appos

uéué VERB 0 root
we AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 discourse

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root
wɨn ADJ 3 amod
map ADJ 3 clf

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 4 nmod
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
pɨk=toʔ NOUN 0 root

naʔcap NOUN 0 root
yatep ADJ 1 amod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yat PART 2 mark

iʔat PRON 5 nsubj
yaʔmo NOUN 3 compound
ci NOUN 5 obj
káʔ ADJ 3 clf
ʔor VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 5 advmod
werem ADV 5 obl
ŋán PART 7 dep

aoro NOUN 2 nmod
cagá NOUN 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 mark

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
menə PART 3 mark

kõm ADV 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
nyahmãm PART 3 advmod
apik ADP 3 case

eken VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
co PART 1 dep
battem ADJ 1 advmod

ocãp NOUN 0 root

kiganape ADV 3 advmod
ep AUX 3 aux
eken VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 3 advmod

owakán VERB 0 root
omãmkəy ADP 1 obl

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf

ar PRON 4 nsubj
wayo NOUN 4 obj
gap ADJ 2 amod
ʔot VERB 0 root

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
aʔkera VERB 1 conj
kanãp SCONJ 1 mark

ĩya NOUN 0 root
ʔɨp ADJ 1 clf

maŋaptem ADJ 3 advmod
ŋaap AUX 3 aux
otoba VERB 0 root

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
nərəŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
óra NOUN 3 compound
wɨy VERB 0 root

tap PRON 2 nsubj
toroyapít VERB 0 root

aʔpɨya VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
wat PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
ʔa ADJ 4 clf
peʔ ADP 4 case

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
nyat PART 1 mark
oken VERB 1 obl
iga PART 3 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
rah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 2 obj
toba VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔet AUX 2 aux

iʔtə PRON 0 root
rap PART 1 case

wat PRON 2 nmod
awe NOUN 4 nsubj
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
capét VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root
mãm PART 2 discourse
at PRON 6 nsubj
towirap NOUN 6 obj
ʔo VERB 2 dep
kanãp SCONJ 6 mark

mẽt ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

ar PRON 2 nsubj
atati VERB 0 root
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod
meŋɨk ADV 2 advmod
to X 2 dep

nãn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 discourse
mẽr ADV 1 advmod
ã X 1 dep

õn PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
(...) PUNCT 3 punct

icagá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔcey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
yat PART 1 mark

aʔkun NOUN 0 root

yét PRON 2 nmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 obj
bat ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 4 appos

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 6 obl
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
web AUX 6 aux
aʔpɨya VERB 0 root

at AUX 0 root

owẽ NOUN 2 compound
gun NOUN 0 root

piro NOUN 0 root

et PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
at PRON 2 nsubj
epɨyap VERB 2 parataxis

õn PRON 7 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
mok NOUN 7 obj
pe PART 3 clf
cára VERB 7 xcomp
kanã PART 5 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 7 aux
iʔke PART 7 advmod

karo NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 mark

haran NOUN 0 root
narap ADJ 1 amod

nãn AUX 5 obj
mã PART 1 mark
at PRON 5 nsubj
aʔwĩm VERB 5 advcl
menə PART 0 root

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 3 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 4 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nakira NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
[agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
aʔwĩ VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 4 mark

iyá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔwero VERB 0 root
wɨy VERB 1 clf
tomãmkəy ADP 1 obl

owirup NOUN 2 obj
tɨra VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 2 appos

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

nãnã ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
agóaʔpət NOUN 4 nsubj
óra NOUN 0 root
wɨy VERB 4 compound
maŋaptem ADJ 4 advmod

Kokõ PROPN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

itɨ NOUN 0 root
op ADJ 1 compound

wat PRON 2 nmod
manikap NOUN 5 obl
peʔ ADP 2 case
ahyə PART 5 case
ekerap VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod

məy ADV 8 advmod
yét PRON 3 det
maʔpəy NOUN 8 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 clf
waʔye AUX 8 aux
cán NOUN 8 obj
nã PART 6 clf
makɨra VERB 0 root

kãram NOUN 2 obj
meʔnẽy VERB 0 root

ŋaʔóa VERB 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 1 aux
[péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
manẽ ADJ 3 amod
ya VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 5 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yar PART 2 mark
iʔke PART 2 advmod

okun NOUN 0 root
ŋɨt ADJ 1 amod

pattem ADJ 4 amod
cúrem ADJ 1 conj
wat PRON 4 nmod
owe NOUN 0 root
tap PART 4 case

karam NOUN 2 obj
natia VERB 0 root

inãwroʔ NOUN 0 root

[õn PRON 4 nsubj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root

nãm NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

kɨrɨwep NOUN 2 compound
tem NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

iyõm NOUN 2 nsubj
ikap AUX 0 root
towenaoba VERB 2 xcomp
co PART 3 dep

owagon PRON 2 nsubj
oyakay VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 1 case

oweʔŋət VERB 0 root

naʔwəy NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔi VERB 0 root
maʔɨp NOUN 2 obl
ʔay ADP 3 case

taykir PART 2 advmod
aʔken VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark

Noep PROPN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

iyá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

tĩŋ NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋət VERB 0 root

ip NOUN 0 root
cahyoy NOUN 1 compound
kɨt ADJ 1 amod

páro NOUN 0 root
pɨy ADJ 1 compound

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
púŋ VERB 1 dep
ye AUX 3 aux

cokcok VERB 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔet AUX 2 aux
yat PART 2 discourse
iʔke PART 2 advmod

məy ADV 4 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
waʔye AUX 0 root

péŋ NOUN 6 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
topə PART 0 root
toat PRON 5 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 6 obj
wĩa VERB 3 ccomp

õn PRON 2 nsubj
emaberopit VERB 0 root
ŋakəy PRON 2 obj

karam NOUN 2 nmod
wirap NOUN 0 root

yét PRON 2 det
maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
iwĩm VERB 1 acl
ahyə PART 1 mark

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
ŋapik PRON 2 obl

itɨ NOUN 0 root
op ADJ 1 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod

naʔwəy NOUN 2 obj
beʔŋət VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 3 dep
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 3 mark

tər ADV 4 obl
iʔke PART 1 advmod
õn PRON 4 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root

owɨya VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
okay AUX 1 aux

ewét VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

maʔpəy NOUN 7 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 7 aux
at PRON 5 nmod
chapéu NOUN 7 obj
káʔ ADJ 5 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
menə PART 7 mark

at PRON 2 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

cawap NOUN 2 nsubj
wɨy VERB 0 root

teʔyoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
tawrem ADJ 1 advmod

ci NOUN 2 compound
mininĩ NOUN 5 obj
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
mõm ADV 2 advmod
mawɨya VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
bat ADJ 1 amod
yet AUX 4 aux
opɨya VERB 0 root

kaʔa NOUN 5 obl
ʔa ADJ 1 clf
peʔ ADP 1 case
ap AUX 5 aux
kãykãy VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 5 aux

oken VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 1 advmod

nãn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
owirap NOUN 3 obj
tɨn VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 dep
co PART 3 dep

wat PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
ip NOUN 4 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
owihmãm ADP 4 obl

naʔyoh NOUN 0 root
nõ ADV 1 advmod

onakɨra NOUN 2 compound
cop NOUN 0 root

abebeʔtɨra VERB 0 root

ŋa PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
[okera VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 4 mark

maʔta NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

iyɨt VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux
oʔa VERB 1 dep
ecap NOUN 1 obj
pɨʔtoʔ ADJ 4 clf
peʔ ADP 4 case

kɨrɨwep NOUN 0 root
pát ADJ 1 amod

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
cára VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
aʔkay AUX 2 aux

eken VERB 0 root
mattem ADJ 1 advmod
ahyə PART 1 mark

paʔpiktem ADJ 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
war PRON 4 nmod
owẽ NOUN 1 nsubj
rap PART 4 case

eyaʔi VERB 0 root

oyãy NOUN 2 nsubj
bemeŋãn VERB 0 root

kaptem ADJ 0 root
at PRON 1 nsubj
ahyə PART 1 mark

óra NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

ocorah NOUN 2 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

nãn AUX 3 obj
ẽn PRON 3 nsubj
itop VERB 0 root

ei NOUN 2 compound
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 2 clf
cú NOUN 2 amod
gáʔ ADJ 2 clf

naʔyop NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

kaʔmep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
(aʔkəy) ADP 1 obj

opía NOUN 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
topə PART 0 root
toat PRON 4 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 2 obj
nõ ADV 4 nmod
wĩn VERB 2 ccomp

ameko NOUN 3 nsubj
cú ADJ 1 amod
yaʔwa VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 mark

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtigat VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
manikap NOUN 3 obj
peya VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 3 appos

oyãy NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

kɨgope ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekap AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
aket PART 2 discourse

cĩm NOUN 2 nsubj
memaʔwaba VERB 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obj

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋorér NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root

cãn NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋen VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 2 clf

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
karoʔwa AUX 1 aux

mãygãra NOUN 2 obj
wĩa VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
[war PRON 5 nmod
owẽ] NOUN 2 nsubj
gay AUX 2 aux

õn PRON 4 nsubj
er PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
noy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 4 obl

parato NOUN 2 nmod
cək NOUN 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
wɨy VERB 0 root

abeʔnan VERB 0 root

cób NOUN 2 obj
mawɨya VERB 0 root

ipá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
capóp NOUN 1 nmod
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

maʔteg NOUN 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

mẽganape ADV 4 advmod
õn PRON 4 nsubj
ameko NOUN 4 obj
top VERB 0 root
matet ADV 4 obl

abaraʔkət VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
bat ADJ 1 amod
óra NOUN 4 compound
wɨy VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
amati VERB 0 root

cego NOUN 0 root
bɨk ADJ 1 compound
kãp ADJ 1 amod

maʔpəy NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

[yét PRON 2 det
péŋ] NOUN 3 nsubj
paʔpan VERB 0 root

et PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 3 nsubj
emakət VERB 0 root

wəwə NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

[ar PRON 2 nsubj
otoy] VERB 5 dep
ye SCONJ 5 mark
wer AUX 5 aux
oweʔcɨra VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
cácá NOUN 3 obj
kotoy VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
ibaʔpat VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
amãn NOUN 3 nsubj
ara VERB 4 dep
gotoy VERB 0 root

iyá NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

mok NOUN 3 compound
peʔ ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root

kaʔto PRON 2 nsubj
karorocapét VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 2 mark

karo NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf
par ADJ 1 amod
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

iu NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

cúrem ADV 4 obl
at PRON 4 nsubj
towirup NOUN 4 obj
ʔop VERB 0 root

cak ADV 5 obl
mãm PART 5 discourse
okap AUX 5 aux
cĩm NOUN 5 obj
ʔóa VERB 0 root

ar PRON 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
pattem ADJ 1 parataxis

naco NOUN 5 obl
ʔerem ADP 1 case
ye AUX 5 aux
kanãp SCONJ 5 mark
iʔkəga VERB 0 root

ŋabenaoy VERB 0 root
abihmãm ADP 1 obl

o=kera VERB 0 root
kanã PART 1 mark

õn PRON 3 nsubj
yaracewag NOUN 3 obj
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop

tokera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
maʔwɨt NOUN 1 nsubj
cú ADJ 3 amod
gay AUX 1 aux

owakán VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ekəy ADP 1 obl

ĩya NOUN 2 nsubj
tẽy VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 5 obj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
õn PRON 5 nsubj
ibɨyap VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
[yét] PRON 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 4 aux
tocaropaba VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 6 nsubj
rap PART 1 case
pat ADJ 1 amod
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

təgana ADV 5 advmod
peʔ ADP 5 case
õn PRON 5 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 5 obj
wĩm VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
iʔkɨy PART 0 root
aʔwĩa VERB 2 xcomp
wet AUX 2 aux

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

púŋ NOUN 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
okay AUX 1 aux
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

pattem ADV 4 advmod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
web AUX 4 aux
okera VERB 0 root

korét NOUN 0 root
capõt ADJ 1 compound
pat ADJ 1 amod

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
igã PART 1 discourse

otoyrem VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux

eken VERB 0 root
wat PRON 3 nmod
manikap NOUN 1 obl
peʔ ADP 3 case
battem ADJ 1 advmod
ahyə PART 1 mark

ekəy ADP 4 obl
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wep AUX 4 aux
owakára VERB 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 4 xcomp
at AUX 4 aux
towɨya VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
amaken VERB 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
ahyə PART 1 mark

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root

aʔtóy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
amaken VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse

caropaptem ADJ 0 root
gaʔto PRON 1 nsubj
garo=kõna ADP 2 clf

were NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse
memã PART 2 discourse

at PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
Naʔkɨt PROPN 3 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

at PRON 2 nsubj
amabaraʔkət VERB 0 root

õn PRON 5 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
ʔa ADJ 3 clf
kət VERB 0 root
cagáro NUM 3 nummod
kõmnem X 5 dep

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 mark
iʔke PART 1 advmod

[maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
pat ADJ 1 amod
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
iyaʔwat VERB 1 dep

oweʔŋen VERB 0 root

wawwaw NOUN 2 nsubj
bay VERB 5 dep
ye SCONJ 5 mark
ŋaʔet AUX 5 aux
toyaʔwara VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ PART 3 clf

ite NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 5 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
pattem ADJ 2 advmod

cúrem ADJ 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 3 nsubj
orakət VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
yat PART 2 mark

kaʔtay VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
naʔwəy NOUN 1 obl
kəy ADP 3 case
aʔi NOUN 1 obl
kəy ADP 5 case
kõam PART 1 mark

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
ʔoa VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux
cak ADV 2 obl
mam X 2 dep

õn PRON 5 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
owã NOUN 5 obj
ŋa PRON 3 clf
pɨy VERB 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
ʔat AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obl

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔpɨy VERB 0 root
gahmõmnem ADV 2 advmod

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
tágɨh NOUN 2 obl
mã ADP 3 case

cárarem ADV 0 root
õn PRON 1 nsubj

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nsubj
ameko NOUN 3 obj
roy VERB 0 root

pecéptem ADJ 2 advmod
aʔtarap ADJ 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
púŋ VERB 2 obl
kanã PART 3 mark
peʔ ADP 3 case

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

naʔwəy NOUN 2 nmod
bía NOUN 0 root

pagon NUM 3 nummod
nóptem X 3 dep
nakõm NOUN 0 root
nap PART 3 nmod
tə PART 3 discourse

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 0 root
rab PART 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod

opá NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

amãn NOUN 4 nsubj
yat PART 4 mark
nãnin PART 4 discourse
tə PART 0 root

naʔyop NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
icɨ NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
kət VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
iʔke PART 4 advmod
menə PART 4 mark

wenwen VERB 0 root
we AUX 1 aux
mãm PART 1 discourse

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
topə PART 1 discourse
nãnin PART 1 discourse

taraptem ADV 2 advmod
õn PRON 0 root
okõna ADP 2 case

eken VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark

taykit PART 2 advmod
eyamoy VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 3 advmod
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

abakán VERB 0 root
aʔpap ADJ 1 amod
kəy ADP 1 case

maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod

nãn PRON 4 obl
mihmãm ADP 1 case
ekab AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔkɨgat VERB 0 root
tpu VERB 2 obl
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

abakán VERB 0 root
ekəy PRON 1 obl

opá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔken VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 3 advmod
ahyə PART 3 mark
ekerap VERB 0 root

pecéptem ADJ 2 advmod
ʔep AUX 0 root
mĩn ADV 2 advmod

enaká NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
omẽn NOUN 3 obj
meropir VERB 0 root
yar PART 3 dep
iʔke PART 3 advmod

kɨgomət PRON 2 det
ip NOUN 3 nsubj
pay VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
ahyə PART 3 dep
úeúe VERB 0 root
ye AUX 3 aux

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ĩriŋ NOUN 3 obj
macéri VERB 0 root
gán PART 3 dep

cúrem ADJ 0 root
wat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔa ADJ 3 clf

cúrem ADV 2 advmod
at PRON 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

matet ADV 0 root
kokoãm PART 1 mark
ocagəptoʔ NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 aux
toyawɨga VERB 1 dep

caʔwət NOUN 0 root
pab ADJ 1 clf
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔan VERB 0 root

okət VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kanã NOUN 3 obj
rakəga VERB 0 root
wet AUX 3 aux
co PART 3 dep
kán PART 3 dep

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
yét PRON 3 nmod
péŋ NOUN 4 nsubj
[ʔet] AUX 0 root

tuytuy VERB 6 obl
Babesáya PROPN 6 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 6 aux
yate NOUN 6 obj
taʔwara VERB 0 root

Júnior PROPN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 nmod
pa VERB 4 obj
gotoy VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

maʔẽ NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

cagáro NOUN 0 root
mərəp ADJ 1 compound

tanaká NOUN 2 compound
peon NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
təgana ADV 3 obl
peʔ ADP 3 case

okera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
okay AUX 1 aux

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf
kĩn ADJ 1 amod
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

iyõm NOUN 2 nsubj
ŋen VERB 0 root
co PART 2 dep
matet ADV 2 obl

owekuy NOUN 0 root
nãn AUX 1 aux
iʔkɨy PART 1 discourse
tə PART 1 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔpap ADJ 3 xcomp
toy VERB 0 root

tabat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
[towéya VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

tocitóga VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

məy ADV 4 advmod
aʔwaʔye AUX 4 aux
totia VERB 4 dep
oyuruŋ VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 4 aux

péŋ NOUN 0 root
mecéb ADJ 1 amod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔmãn AUX 1 cop

aʔwĩa VERB 0 root
púŋ VERB 1 obl
ʔa AUX 1 aux

er PRON 2 nmod
icɨ NOUN 0 root

át NOUN 3 obl
mãm PART 3 discourse
oyaʔwarap VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
Cabirera PROPN 1 obl
kõm ADP 4 case

iyã NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

okennem VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔ=rati VERB 0 root

oyaʔwara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux
aʔtoy VERB 1 xcomp
iga PART 3 discourse

kãykãy VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
iʔke PART 1 advmod

muturum VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

ameko NOUN 2 nmod
ʔora NOUN 0 root

ewét VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

wayo NOUN 4 obj
gap ADJ 1 amod
ar PRON 4 nsubj
iʔop VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
paʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod
mɨy ADV 3 advmod
mãm PART 3 discourse

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod
matet ADV 3 obl

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
[ewpaka VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔet AUX 0 root
matet ADV 2 obl

púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wet AUX 1 aux

owaraʔkət VERB 0 root

məy ADV 2 advmod
mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 2 aux
yét PRON 6 det
kanã ADV 6 advmod
cit NOUN 7 obj
toba VERB 2 conj

õn PRON 3 nsubj
okõna ADP 3 mark
okera VERB 0 root

cicɨ NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

icey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf

at PRON 2 nsubj
tomãmwĩn VERB 0 root

kiganape ADV 4 advmod
ap AUX 4 aux
naʔto NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 4 advmod

[ar PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 6 nsubj
rab PART 2 case
iʔke] PART 2 advmod
ewirup NOUN 6 obj
ʔot VERB 0 root

tenaʔwara VERB 0 root
reʔkay AUX 1 aux

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
peʔnɨy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 4 obj
tap PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
cúrem ADV 4 advmod

tokera VERB 0 root
[maʔwɨt NOUN 1 nsubj
cú] ADJ 2 amod
kay AUX 1 aux

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 mark
matet ADV 4 obl

koran NOUN 0 root
map ADJ 1 nmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
abeʔmẽn VERB 0 root

tap PRON 2 nsubj
táy ADJ 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop
iʔke PART 2 advmod

aʔwét VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 1 case

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

taykir PART 3 advmod
at PRON 3 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
iga PART 3 mark

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
cĩm NOUN 4 obj
nati VERB 0 root
aʔcá VERB 4 xcomp
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
toʔwa AUX 5 aux

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nsubj
yét PRON 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

[at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 4 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
nãt] SCONJ 4 mark
totia VERB 4 dep

war PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
ib NOUN 4 obj
an VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
epɨy VERB 0 root
et PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 4 clf
peʔ PART 4 case

abeʔcɨn VERB 0 root
[noorawa VERB 1 dep
nãt SCONJ 2 mark
toʔwa AUX 2 aux
rawrem] ADJ 2 advmod

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root
paʔpik ADJ 3 amod
kap ADJ 3 clf

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 1 discourse
igã PART 1 discourse

kɨganape ADV 3 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekerap VERB 0 root

ameko NOUN 3 nsubj
cú ADJ 1 amod
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
nyat PART 3 mark
iʔke PART 3 advmod

cãn NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj

maʔpəy NOUN 5 obj
bat ADJ 1 amod
tokõna ADP 5 case
at PRON 5 nsubj
ipɨy VERB 0 root

wagag NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

acagá NOUN 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
aʔpap ADJ 4 amod
ʔet AUX 4 aux
towecɨra VERB 0 root

ipá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

toto NOUN 2 nsubj
ibetõ VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 2 advmod
mãm PART 2 discourse
ŋán PART 2 dep

Antônio PROPN 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 3 clf
naʔot ADV 3 advmod
peʔ ADP 5 case

[õn PRON 0 root
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
at PRON 4 nsubj
icapé VERB 1 ccomp

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 1 advmod
iket VERB 0 root

owaʔpan VERB 0 root
aʔpẽya VERB 1 xcomp
gán PART 1 dep

kõm ADV 3 advmod
aʔcat NOUN 3 obj
menə PART 0 root

abaʔpan VERB 0 root

nãn AUX 3 obl
bihmãm ADP 1 case
ekerap VERB 0 root

karam NOUN 2 compound
nãk NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf
ʔĩt ADJ 2 amod
pɨʔ ADJ 2 clf

ɨu NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root
kãp ADJ 3 amod
pap ADJ 3 clf

karo NOUN 2 compound
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 2 clf
pĩg ADJ 2 amod
aʔ ADJ 2 clf

[mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
õn PRON 4 nsubj
itop VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

onoroŋ VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
tocit NOUN 1 obl
paʔpara VERB 1 dep

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

iyãy NOUN 0 root
gõm ADP 1 case

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
[ken] VERB 0 root

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

inãw NOUN 2 obj
beʔnogat VERB 0 root

cego NOUN 0 root
bɨk ADJ 1 compound

taykit PART 2 advmod
ebiaʔan VERB 0 root
iga PART 2 mark
mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 2 obl
kəy ADP 4 case

boi NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
towaʔpara VERB 0 root
towewĩa VERB 3 conj

kõm ADV 4 advmod
iʔkay AUX 4 aux
Kabirera PROPN 4 obj
wĩa VERB 0 root
iʔkõna PART 4 nsubj

ar PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod

cárarem ADJ 0 root
õn PRON 1 nsubj

aʔtoba VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 1 advmod
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

at PRON 3 nsubj
topə PART 3 mark
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root

paramu VERB 0 root
ʔa AUX 1 aux
owikop ADP 1 obl

kaʔto PRON 4 nsubj
karowéya VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop

makap NOUN 0 root
kap ADJ 1 clf

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
amagahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

mĩm ADV 5 obl
mãm PART 5 discourse
iʔke PART 1 advmod
péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
yowarap VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 obj
tati VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ŋato VERB 3 dep
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
wa AUX 5 aux

ip NOUN 2 obj
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 2 aux
yahmãm PART 2 advmod

oken VERB 0 root
kãy VERB 3 obj
kãy VERB 1 obj
kanãp ADV 1 advmod

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

pecéptem ADJ 0 root
ẽn PRON 1 nsubj
et PRON 4 nmod
iyõm NOUN 1 obl
ŋõm ADP 4 case

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ekera VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
ahyə PART 4 mark

aʔken VERB 0 root
pə PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

maʔpəy NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
ʔĩttem ADV 2 advmod

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

maʔwit NOUN 4 nsubj
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
wɨy VERB 0 root

owɨya VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux

məy ADV 6 advmod
péŋ NOUN 6 nsubj
ʔet AUX 6 aux
kohmãy NOUN 6 obl
ʔerem ADP 6 case
tokəga VERB 0 root

wéy VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
tágɨp NOUN 1 obj
peʔ ADP 3 case

makap NOUN 0 root
kap ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
gap ADJ 1 clf

icapop NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

abeʔŋət VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 3 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
igu ADJ 5 amod
ẽn PRON 6 nsubj
ip NOUN 6 obj
yapít VERB 0 root

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
béŋ NOUN 4 obj
noy VERB 1 dep

wayo NOUN 0 root
bap ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
mãygãra NOUN 4 nsubj
etóp VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 3 ccomp
menə PART 0 root
aket PART 3 discourse

péŋ NOUN 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
itop VERB 1 acl

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
manikap NOUN 0 root

pãttem ADJ 0 root
at PRON 1 nsubj
topə PART 1 parataxis

oweʔcɨn VERB 0 root
[at PRON 3 nsubj
oto VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

matet ADV 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
rokõna ADP 1 mark
Petĩp PROPN 6 nsubj
ʔep AUX 6 aux
towetõa VERB 1 dep

pattem ADJ 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
õn PRON 1 nsubj

wat PRON 2 nmod
awe NOUN 3 nsubj
orabitẽy VERB 0 root

taykit PART 3 advmod
yawbe NOUN 3 nsubj
bewĩa VERB 0 root

aʔpábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

wayo NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root

kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 1 clf

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
an VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 3 advmod
rẽna ADV 3 advmod

ŋa PRON 2 nsubj
oʔtoy VERB 0 root
maŋaptem ADJ 2 advmod

iʔca NOUN 2 nmod
macahmərəba VERB 0 root
rokõna ADP 2 mark

tɨk VERB 2 compound
tɨk VERB 7 parataxis
at AUX 2 aux
toat PRON 5 nmod
wirik NOUN 7 obj
kanã ADV 5 advmod
təga VERB 0 root
tə PART 7 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
pə PART 2 advmod

aʔken VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

móa NOUN 4 obj
rokõna ADP 4 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ibeʔtɨn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

kɨgomət PRON 7 dep
ĩyá NOUN 7 dep
naká NOUN 2 compound
mã ADP 2 case
at PRON 7 nsubj
yate NOUN 7 obj
wĩm VERB 0 root

ipá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

inãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

toyãy NOUN 4 obj
ʔa ADJ 1 clf
binõ NOUN 1 compound
ya VERB 0 root

inakároʔ NOUN 0 root

karoat PRON 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
tẽna ADV 2 advmod

iʔtə PRON 5 nsubj
maʔpəy NOUN 4 nmod
ŋa PRON 2 clf
cet NOUN 5 obj
maʔã VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 5 advmod
nãnin PART 5 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
ŋabean VERB 0 root
ya SCONJ 5 mark
ŋa PRON 5 nsubj
oyaʔti VERB 2 dep
nãn AUX 5 cop

ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ahyə PART 5 discourse
menə PART 5 discourse
kanã NOUN 5 nmod
tayãn VERB 0 root
menə PART 5 discourse

iʔnõ PRON 0 root
gəy ADP 1 case
rə PART 1 mark

cán NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 advmod
kán PART 2 dep

owicorop ADJ 2 xcomp
ken VERB 0 root

oken VERB 0 root

oyãy NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔwɨy VERB 0 root
yat PART 1 mark
iʔke PART 1 advmod

wayo NOUN 2 compound
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 2 clf
cára ADJ 2 amod
beʔ ADJ 2 clf

at PRON 5 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 3 clf
pẽ VERB 0 root
mãm PART 5 discourse

wat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
awe NOUN 4 obj
capét VERB 0 root

agóaʔpər NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

mani NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
raken VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 0 root
et PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 1 nsubj
rap PART 3 case

towagon NOUN 0 root
gəy PART 1 case

kɨgomət PRON 2 det
ĩya NOUN 4 obj
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
iwĩ VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
pekey VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

kɨganapət ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
at PRON 4 nsubj
etop VERB 0 root

kanɑ̃y ADV 4 advmod
abagon NOUN 4 nsubj
nap PART 2 case
waʔye AUX 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

wəŋnem ADJ 4 advmod
mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 4 aux
iʔpéya VERB 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
aʔkəy PRON 1 obl

toat PRON 2 nmod
páy ADJ 0 root
gəy PART 2 case
roʔwa AUX 2 aux

iyõm NOUN 0 root
mãt ADJ 1 amod

karam NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

onaká NOUN 2 obj
yakoy VERB 0 root
wenwen VERB 2 xcomp
kanãp ADV 3 advmod
cúrem ADV 3 advmod

aʔ=ken VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
ip NOUN 3 nmod
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
kanã PART 3 dep

pew NOUN 0 root
bət ADJ 1 amod

wayo NOUN 2 compound
nak NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 2 clf
cú ADJ 2 amod
bap ADJ 2 clf

ei NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwɨr NOUN 0 root
yet AUX 1 aux
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 1 xcomp

war PRON 2 nmod
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
ʔara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 3 aux
co PART 3 mark

at PRON 3 nsubj
ĩya NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
kokõ NOUN 5 obj
wĩa VERB 3 conj
kõam PART 5 mark

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 3 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtigat VERB 0 root

kopət NOUN 0 root
to PART 1 clf
wecéb ADJ 1 amod
aʔmãn AUX 1 cop

ip NOUN 4 nsubj
tokõna ADP 1 mark
õn PRON 4 nsubj
yɨy VERB 0 root

korét NOUN 0 root
capõt ADJ 1 compound

õn PRON 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
yati VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop
iʔke PART 3 clf

weriweri VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
cahwíptem ADJ 1 advmod

to=kera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 ccomp

kanãy ADV 7 advmod
pèŋ NOUN 7 nsubj
ʔep AUX 7 aux
toat PRON 5 nmod
mok NOUN 7 obj
peroʔ ADJ 5 clf
cára VERB 0 root
icɨ NOUN 7 obl
peʔ ADP 8 case

war PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 3 obj
ʔet AUX 0 root
okəy ADP 3 case
matet ADV 3 obl

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔi VERB 0 root
toat PRON 4 nmod
mok NOUN 6 obj
peʔ ADJ 4 clf
cán VERB 2 xcomp
iga PART 6 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
uéué VERB 2 dep
kanãp ADV 2 advmod

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
oturum VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

wayo NOUN 2 compound
naká NOUN 0 root

wáya NOUN 0 root
ʔɨp ADJ 1 clf

cibekonnoʔ NOUN 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
para ADJ 1 amod
ŋa PRON 1 clf

oken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod