wotye VERB 0 root
pukpuga VERB 1 advcl
pit PRON 2 parataxis

op ADV 2 advmod
ten VERB 0 root
eya PART 2 dep
õn PRON 2 nsubj

Kito NOUN 7 nsubj
nãkowut NOUN 7 obj
moat NOUN 4 dep
xauwet NOUN 2 nmod
moke NOUN 4 conj
kepit CCONJ 5 cc
xagara VERB 0 root

opũãtemwã VERB 0 root
ota AUX 1 aux

mokat ADV 3 advmod
peitõã ADV 3 advmod
etera VERB 0 root
amang VERB 3 parataxis
korop VERB 3 parataxis
kux NOUN 5 obl
me ADP 6 case

i INTJ 5 discourse
eya PART 5 dep
on PRON 5 nsubj
wet ADV 5 advmod
toa VERB 0 root
ke PART 5 discourse
pit ADV 5 advmod

arimot NOUN 0 root
urot NOUN 1 nmod
arimot NOUN 1 discourse
urot NOUN 3 nmod

ngot NOUN 2 dep
xiaret NOUN 0 root

yeman ADV 3 advmod
ngot NOUN 3 obj
kana VERB 0 root
oen VERB 3 dep

xeke PRON 0 root
xēke PART 1 discourse
ke PART 1 discourse

xop DET 4 obl
me ADP 1 case
pote ADV 4 advmod
worawiget NOUN 0 root
xop DET 4 obl
me ADP 5 case

nãpẽrenã ADV 3 advmod
kito NOUN 3 nsubj
eapītera VERB 0 root
pīxe AUX 3 aux

etxekup NOUN 2 obj
keya VERB 0 root

putorot NOUN 0 root
xēke PART 1 discourse
ke PART 1 discourse
xēt PART 1 dep

woaret NOUN 0 root
koa PART 1 discourse

etera VERB 0 root
korop VERB 1 xcomp

xop DET 2 obj
ten VERB 0 root
eya PART 2 dep
on PRON 2 nsubj
ke PART 2 discourse

yãn ADV 3 advmod
oxepngoret NOUN 3 obj
oerã VERB 0 root
kepit CCONJ 5 cc
eta VERB 3 conj
on PRON 5 nsubj
toa VERB 5 dep

kepit CCONJ 5 cc
eya PART 5 dep
õn PRON 5 nsubj
waokatmõ ADV 5 advmod
papiknga VERB 0 root
ke PART 5 discourse

kito NOUN 6 obj
moke NOUN 3 nmod
xiat NOUN 1 nmod
ekuwaora VERB 1 dep
kepit CCONJ 6 dep
pukpuga VERB 0 root
õn PRON 6 nsubj

mokat ADV 2 advmod
etera VERB 0 root
kurux VERB 2 parataxis
amang VERB 2 parataxis
pīxe ADV 4 advmod

xop DET 3 nmod
koa PART 3 discourse
ten ADV 4 advmod
nã VERB 5 xcomp
peka VERB 0 root

ama ADV 4 advmod
ngot NOUN 3 nmod
xiaret NOUN 4 nsubj
eya VERB 0 root
kurux VERB 4 dep
amang VERB 4 dep
ngot NOUN 8 obj
oen VERB 4 parataxis
wimõ ADV 8 advmod
nitēt PART 8 discourse

etera VERB 0 root
kurux VERB 1 parataxis
amang VERB 1 parataxis
ngot NOUN 5 obj
keya VERB 1 parataxis
pīxe ADV 5 advmod

mokat ADV 2 advmod
etera VERB 0 root
korop VERB 2 dep
noa NOUN 3 obl
pe ADP 4 case