púŋ VERB 3 xcomp
ahyə PART 3 mark
ekay AUX 0 root
eʔa AUX 3 aux

itɨ NOUN 2 nmod
cãp NOUN 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf
kĩn ADJ 1 amod
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

Noep PROPN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

tokera VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
igã PART 1 discourse

taptoba VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 1 appos

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 discourse
memã PART 2 discourse

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 advmod

Kokõ PROPN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtigat VERB 0 root

ŋaʔóa VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 2 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
ʔĩttem ADJ 2 advmod

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ PART 3 clf

yate NOUN 2 nmod
gap NOUN 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
matet ADV 1 advmod
wat PRON 4 nmod
iyõm NOUN 1 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

õn PRON 5 nsubj
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
toy VERB 0 root

onaká NOUN 2 obj
yakoy VERB 0 root
wenwen VERB 2 xcomp
kanãp ADV 3 advmod
cúrem ADV 3 advmod

õn PRON 4 nsubj
amãn NOUN 3 nsubj
ara VERB 4 dep
gotoy VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
ibaʔpat VERB 0 root

at AUX 0 root

abeʔnan VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj

taykit PART 3 advmod
yawbe NOUN 3 nsubj
bewĩa VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 3 ccomp
menə PART 0 root
aket PART 3 discourse

karo NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 3 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

ipá NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

kaʔmep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
(aʔkəy) ADP 1 obj

móa NOUN 4 obj
rokõna ADP 4 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ibeʔtɨn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

ĩya NOUN 2 nsubj
tẽy VERB 0 root

ei NOUN 2 compound
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 2 clf
cú NOUN 2 amod
gáʔ ADJ 2 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔ=rati VERB 0 root

owẽ NOUN 2 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 3 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

mɨy ADV 3 amod
mãm PART 1 discourse
péŋ NOUN 0 root
ʔep AUX 3 aux
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
amagahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop

amãn NOUN 4 nsubj
yat PART 4 mark
nãnin PART 4 discourse
tə PART 0 root

wat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 3 case

oyakõy VERB 0 root
bãttem ADV 1 advmod

mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 1 aux
[péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
manẽ ADJ 3 amod
ya VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 5 mark

wat PRON 2 nmod
manikap NOUN 3 obj
peya VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 3 appos

weriweri VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
cahwíptem ADJ 1 advmod

yét PRON 2 nmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 obj
bat ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 4 appos

ocorah NOUN 2 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

paya NOUN 0 root
bab ADJ 1 clf
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

wĩt NOUN 2 compound
wĩaw NOUN 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 2 aux
at PRON 2 nsubj
chapéu NOUN 7 obj
káʔ ADJ 5 clf
to VERB 2 advcl
kanãp ADV 7 mark

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔi VERB 0 root
toat PRON 4 nmod
mok NOUN 6 obj
peʔ ADJ 4 clf
cán VERB 2 xcomp
iga PART 6 mark

cúrem ADJ 0 root
wat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 nsubj
ʔa ADJ 3 clf

õn PRON 4 nsubj
púŋ VERB 4 obl
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 aux

icagá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nãk NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 1 clf

péŋ NOUN 0 root
tə PART 1 discourse

kõm ADV 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
iʔkɨy PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

naʔcap NOUN 0 root
yatep ADJ 1 amod

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root

naʔwəy NOUN 2 obj
beʔŋət VERB 0 root

were NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔpɨy VERB 0 root
gahmõmnem ADV 2 advmod

mãygãra NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop

inãw NOUN 2 obj
beʔnogat VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 3 obl
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod

aʔ=ken VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
an VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 3 advmod
rẽna ADV 3 advmod

owagon PRON 2 nsubj
oyakay VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
ʔoa VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux
cak ADV 2 obl
mam X 2 dep

wayo NOUN 2 compound
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 2 clf
cára ADJ 2 amod
beʔ ADJ 2 clf

boi NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
towaʔpara VERB 0 root
towewĩa VERB 3 conj

cego NOUN 0 root
bɨk ADJ 1 compound
kãp ADJ 1 amod

aʔwak ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔet AUX 2 aux

maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod

owaʔpan VERB 0 root
aʔpẽya VERB 1 xcomp
gán PART 1 dep

naʔyoh NOUN 0 root
nõ ADV 1 advmod

nãn PRON 4 obl
mihmãm ADP 1 case
ekab AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

tuŋnoʔ NOUN 0 root

opábe NOUN 3 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod
cigá NOUN 0 root

apəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 4 aux
topaba VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 4 advmod
mãm PART 4 discourse

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
iʔkap AUX 3 aux
aʔwĩa VERB 0 root

toyãy NOUN 4 obj
ʔa ADJ 1 clf
binõ NOUN 1 compound
ya VERB 0 root

kɨganapət ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
at PRON 4 nsubj
etop VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

ayowan VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nakira NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

ewét VERB 0 root
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
pat ADJ 1 amod
ŋanãn AUX 1 cop

ite NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nmod
nakɨra NOUN 5 nmod
cop NOUN 0 root

kanɑ̃y ADV 4 advmod
abagon NOUN 4 nsubj
nap PART 2 case
waʔye AUX 0 root

iʔca NOUN 2 nmod
macahmərəba VERB 0 root
rokõna ADP 2 mark

aʔkun NOUN 0 root

oken VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 1 advmod

aoro NOUN 2 nmod
cagá NOUN 0 root

kɨgomət PRON 7 dep
ĩyá NOUN 7 dep
naká NOUN 2 compound
mã ADP 2 case
at PRON 7 nsubj
yate NOUN 7 obj
wĩm VERB 0 root

kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 1 clf

aʔken VERB 0 root
iʔkɨy PART 1 parataxis

maʔteg NOUN 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

ʔittem ADJ 3 advmod
õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root

karo NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ ADJ 1 clf

ip NOUN 0 root
cahyoy NOUN 1 compound

məy ADV 2 advmod
mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 2 aux
yét PRON 6 det
kanã ADV 6 advmod
cit NOUN 7 obj
toba VERB 2 conj

cãn NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋen VERB 0 root

yét PRON 2 det
maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root

kaptem ADJ 0 root
at PRON 1 nsubj
ahyə PART 1 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
icɨ NOUN 0 root

caropaptem ADJ 0 root
gaʔto PRON 1 nsubj
garo=kõna ADP 2 clf

tocitóga VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 1 aux

oken VERB 0 root
péŋ NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 case
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
ʔaʔ PART 4 clf
peʔ ADP 4 case

púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wet AUX 1 aux

aʔtóy VERB 0 root

ameko NOUN 2 nmod
ʔora NOUN 0 root

pattem ADJ 4 amod
cúrem ADJ 1 conj
wat PRON 4 nmod
owe NOUN 0 root
tap PART 4 case

nãn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 discourse

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
aʔkera VERB 1 conj
kanãp SCONJ 1 mark

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
raken VERB 0 root

inãk NOUN 0 root
ká ADJ 1 clf
becép ADJ 1 amod
káʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
cára VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
aʔkay AUX 2 aux

tẽna ADV 5 advmod
iʔke PART 5 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 5 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 5 obj
arap VERB 0 root

tĩŋ NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋət VERB 0 root

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
cú ADJ 2 amod
wĩn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
[ewpaka VERB 2 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 3 mark

abeʔŋət VERB 0 root

nãm NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
biru NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
kət VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
iʔke PART 4 advmod
menə PART 4 mark

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 2 amod

púŋ NOUN 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
okay AUX 1 aux
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

ẽn PRON 3 nsubj
yaw NOUN 3 obj
rati VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
pekey VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 compound
naká NOUN 0 root
bap PART 1 clf

iu NOUN 3 compound
bap ADJ 1 clf
ci NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
yat PART 2 mark

kɨganape ADV 3 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekerap VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

iyõm NOUN 0 root
mãt ADJ 1 amod

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ĩriŋ NOUN 3 obj
macéri VERB 0 root
gán PART 3 dep

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aʔ=to VERB 2 advcl
kanãp SCONJ 3 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

pagon NUM 3 nummod
nóptem X 3 dep
nakõm NOUN 0 root
nap PART 3 nmod
tə PART 3 discourse

ip NOUN 2 obj
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 2 aux
yahmãm PART 2 advmod

maʔwit NOUN 4 nsubj
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
wɨy VERB 0 root

taykit PART 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ekɨga VERB 0 root

cán NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
ŋabean VERB 0 root
ya SCONJ 5 mark
ŋa PRON 5 nsubj
oyaʔti VERB 2 dep
nãn AUX 5 cop

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

mani NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
wɨy VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
epɨy VERB 0 root
co PART 2 dep

ŋaramãya VERB 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ekəy ADP 1 obl

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 2 amod

at PRON 2 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

to=kera VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 1 ccomp

ŋit VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 1 aux
aʔkay AUX 1 aux
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

at PRON 5 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
kaʔaʔ NOUN 5 obj
ʔaʔ ADJ 3 clf
pẽn VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

tɨk VERB 2 compound
tɨk VERB 7 parataxis
at AUX 2 aux
toat PRON 5 nmod
wirik NOUN 7 obj
kanã ADV 5 advmod
təga VERB 0 root
tə PART 7 mark

at PRON 3 nsubj
ahyə PART 3 dep
úeúe VERB 0 root
ye AUX 3 aux

õn PRON 3 nsubj
cĩm NOUN 3 obj
yegat VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 mark
co PART 3 dep

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
at PRON 5 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 5 clf
peʔ ADP 5 case

ipá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 2 nsubj
amaken VERB 0 root

ʔiriŋ NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 mark
iʔke PART 1 advmod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔpap ADJ 3 xcomp
toy VERB 0 root

kɨgope ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
ekap AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
mãygãra NOUN 4 nsubj
etóp VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
yaracewag NOUN 3 obj
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
át NOUN 1 obl
mãm PART 1 discourse

icapop NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 1 case

õn PRON 3 nsubj
péŋ NOUN 3 obj
yati VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop
iʔke PART 3 clf

[õn PRON 4 nsubj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root

mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 2 nsubj
imatẽran VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 advmod
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
para ADJ 1 amod
ŋa PRON 1 clf

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
téy VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 4 obj
tap PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
cúrem ADV 4 advmod

okennem VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux

war PRON 2 nmod
owã NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
bakán VERB 0 root
okəy ADP 4 mark

púŋ VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
ahyə PART 1 mark

aʔwero NOUN 2 obj
toba VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux

pew NOUN 0 root
bət ADJ 1 amod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

naʔyop NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cú ADJ 1 amod
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

ẽn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark
iket VERB 1 dep

karokérara VERB 0 root

toto NOUN 2 nsubj
ibetõ VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 2 advmod
mãm PART 2 discourse
ŋán PART 2 dep

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
coke PART 2 discourse

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
manikap NOUN 0 root

Petɨp PROPN 2 nsubj
petõn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
matet ADV 2 obl

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
yar PART 2 mark
iʔke PART 2 advmod

mãygãra NOUN 2 obj
wĩa VERB 5 xcomp
wat PRON 4 nmod
owẽ NOUN 5 nsubj
kay AUX 0 root

aʔwét VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 1 case

aʔcey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
yat PART 1 mark

toat PRON 2 nmod
páy ADJ 0 root
gəy PART 2 case
roʔwa AUX 2 aux

oyaʔwara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 1 aux
aʔtoy VERB 1 xcomp
iga PART 3 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
okõna ADP 3 mark

okun NOUN 0 root
ŋɨt ADJ 1 amod

oti VERB 0 root
gán PART 1 dep

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
igã PART 3 mark

maʔɨp NOUN 0 root
cakot ADJ 1 amod

cárarem ADJ 0 root
õn PRON 1 nsubj

naʔto NOUN 5 obj
cú ADJ 1 amod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
at PRON 5 nsubj
iwĩ VERB 0 root

kanãy ADV 7 advmod
pèŋ NOUN 7 nsubj
ʔep AUX 7 aux
toat PRON 5 nmod
mok NOUN 7 obj
peroʔ ADJ 5 clf
cára VERB 0 root
icɨ NOUN 7 obl
peʔ ADP 8 case

karoat PRON 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
tẽna ADV 2 advmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
abeʔmẽn VERB 0 root

pecéptem ADJ 2 advmod
aʔtarap ADJ 0 root

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
iket VERB 0 root

ŋabenaoy VERB 0 root
abihmãm ADP 1 obl

ipá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

óra NOUN 0 root
becép ADJ 1 amod

iyõm NOUN 0 root
ŋõm ADP 1 case

owicorop ADJ 2 xcomp
ken VERB 0 root

abaʔpan VERB 0 root

mẽt ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
igã PART 1 discourse

icey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf

taraptem ADV 2 advmod
õn PRON 0 root
okõna ADP 2 case

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
pewit NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 3 punct
ŋaat PRON 6 nmod
pewit NOUN 3 appos
koãm PART 6 mark

õn PRON 4 nsubj
er PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
noy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 4 obl

[at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
macaʔɨt NOUN 4 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
nãt] SCONJ 4 mark
totia VERB 4 dep

opábeʔ NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 1 punct
epábeʔ NOUN 1 conj
koãm PART 3 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
bat ADJ 1 amod
óra NOUN 4 compound
wɨy VERB 0 root

korét NOUN 0 root
capõt ADJ 1 compound

maʔpəy NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
õn PART 5 nsubj
itop VERB 3 ccomp

onakɨra NOUN 2 compound
cop NOUN 0 root

mĩm ADV 5 obl
mãm PART 5 discourse
iʔke PART 1 advmod
péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
yowarap VERB 0 root

teʔyoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
tawrem ADJ 1 advmod

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔkɨgat VERB 0 root
tpu VERB 2 obl
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

wagag NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

o=kera VERB 0 root
kanã PART 1 mark

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
aʔpap ADJ 4 amod
ʔet AUX 4 aux
towecɨra VERB 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
aʔkəy PRON 1 obl

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

karamnoʔ NOUN 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 6 nsubj
rap PART 1 case
pat ADJ 1 amod
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

naʔyop NOUN 0 root
cɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

yep VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux

át NOUN 3 obl
mãm PART 3 discourse
oyaʔwarap VERB 0 root

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
nərəŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

tenaʔwara VERB 0 root
reʔkay AUX 1 aux

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
roy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 3 clf

pattem ADV 4 advmod
iʔke PART 1 advmod
web AUX 4 aux
okera VERB 0 root

karo NOUN 2 nmod
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ekera VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
ahyə PART 4 mark

aʔpɨya VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
wat PRON 4 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
ʔa ADJ 4 clf
peʔ ADP 4 case

at PRON 3 nsubj
towirup NOUN 3 obj
ʔot VERB 0 root
cúrem ADV 3 advmod

oyãy NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

oyãy NOUN 2 nsubj
bemeŋãn VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 obj
tati VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ŋato VERB 3 dep
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
wa AUX 5 aux

wayo NOUN 2 compound
nak NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 2 clf
cú ADJ 2 amod
bap ADJ 2 clf

eken VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 1 mark

war PRON 2 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 nsubj
ib NOUN 4 obj
an VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
aket PART 2 discourse

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
makãri NOUN 4 obj
rakət VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
wep AUX 7 aux
aʔtoba VERB 2 ccomp

iʔtə PRON 5 nsubj
maʔpəy NOUN 4 nmod
ŋa PRON 2 clf
cet NOUN 5 obj
maʔã VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 5 advmod
nãnin PART 5 mark

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
ragahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop

maʔwɨr NOUN 0 root
yet AUX 1 aux
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 1 xcomp

púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
karoʔwa AUX 1 aux

maʔpəy NOUN 7 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 7 aux
at PRON 5 nmod
chapéu NOUN 7 obj
káʔ ADJ 5 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
menə PART 7 mark

nãn AUX 2 nsubj
oturum VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 mark

tap PRON 2 nsubj
táy ADJ 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop
iʔke PART 2 advmod

nãn AUX 3 nsubj
ikap AUX 3 aux
púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

iyãy NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

Antônio PROPN 2 nsubj
yãn VERB 0 root
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 3 clf
naʔot ADV 3 advmod
peʔ ADP 5 case

[ar PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 6 nsubj
rab PART 2 case
iʔke] PART 2 advmod
ewirup NOUN 6 obj
ʔot VERB 0 root

naʔwəy NOUN 2 nmod
bía NOUN 0 root

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
yét PRON 3 nmod
péŋ NOUN 4 nsubj
[ʔet] AUX 0 root

itɨ NOUN 0 root
op ADJ 1 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod

aʔken VERB 0 root
pə PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root
paʔpik ADJ 3 amod
kap ADJ 3 clf

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
tanogat VERB 0 root

oken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
cĩm NOUN 4 obj
nati VERB 0 root
aʔcá VERB 4 xcomp
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
toʔwa AUX 5 aux

péŋ NOUN 3 dep
iʔke PART 1 advmod
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
tə PART 3 mark

õn PRON 2 nsubj
emaberopit VERB 0 root
ŋakəy PRON 2 obj

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

uéué VERB 0 root
we AUX 1 aux
yat PART 1 discourse

wəŋnem ADJ 4 advmod
mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 4 nsubj
ʔet AUX 4 aux
iʔpéya VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
ŋapik PRON 2 obl

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ameko NOUN 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 4 nmod
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
pɨk=toʔ NOUN 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
omãmnoy VERB 0 root

karam NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

tuy VERB 6 obl
Babesáya PROPN 6 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 6 aux
yate NOUN 6 obj
taʔwara VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
ip NOUN 3 nmod
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
kanã PART 3 dep

mok NOUN 0 root
pab ADJ 1 clf
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔta NOUN 0 root
maʔ ADJ 1 clf

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
topə PART 1 discourse
nãnin PART 1 discourse

owaraʔkət VERB 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obj

okət VERB 0 root

oweʔŋət VERB 0 root

péŋ NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aket PART 2 mark
igã PART 2 mark

koran NOUN 0 root
map ADJ 1 nmod

eyaʔi VERB 0 root

icap NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cára ADJ 1 amod
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 4 xcomp
at AUX 4 aux
towɨya VERB 0 root

acagá NOUN 0 root

epɑ̃n VERB 0 root
mãm PART 1 discourse
ahyə PART 1 mark

kõm ADV 3 advmod
aʔcat NOUN 3 obj
menə PART 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
ecapét VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 2 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
pə PART 2 advmod

ip NOUN 4 nsubj
tokõna ADP 1 mark
õn PRON 4 nsubj
yɨy VERB 0 root

pattem ADJ 3 advmod
ahyə PART 3 mark
ekerap VERB 0 root

tomanẽ NOUN 2 nmod
mãŋa VERB 0 root
tə PART 2 discourse

war PRON 2 nmod
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
ʔara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 3 aux
co PART 3 mark

[yét PRON 2 det
péŋ] NOUN 3 nsubj
paʔpan VERB 0 root

cibekonnoʔ NOUN 0 root

owakán VERB 0 root
omãmkəy ADP 1 obl

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 1 advmod
iket VERB 0 root

məy ADV 8 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 8 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 8 aux
at PRON 6 nmod
chapéu NOUN 8 obj
káʔ ADJ 6 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
ɨgana NOUN 8 obl
peʔ ADP 9 case

cãn NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

aʔken VERB 0 root

ar PRON 2 nsubj
atati VERB 0 root
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod
meŋɨk ADV 2 advmod
to X 2 dep

aʔcot NOUN 0 root
tap PART 1 case

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 0 root
rab PART 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod

wayo NOUN 4 obj
gap ADJ 1 amod
ar PRON 4 nsubj
iʔop VERB 0 root

tanaká NOUN 2 compound
peon NOUN 0 root

yaw NOUN 0 root
gõam ADV 1 advmod

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
nyat PART 1 mark
oken VERB 1 obl
iga PART 3 mark