ocorah NOUN 2 nsubj
wét VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
cĩm NOUN 3 obj
yegat VERB 0 root
yat PART 3 mark
co PART 3 dep

wirik NOUN 2 compound
kanã NOUN 0 root

taykit PART 3 advmod
yawbe NOUN 3 nsubj
bewĩa VERB 0 root

oyaʔwan VERB 0 root
aʔkera VERB 1 conj
kanãp SCONJ 1 mark

Petɨp PROPN 2 nsubj
petõn VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
matet ADV 2 obl

púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 1 aux
iʔke PART 1 advmod
wet AUX 1 aux

maʔwɨt NOUN 3 nsubj
ip NOUN 3 obj
ʔɨy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 3 obl
cagárokõmnem NUM 2 nummod

yep VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux

məy ADV 8 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 8 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 8 aux
at PRON 6 nmod
chapéu NOUN 8 obj
káʔ ADJ 6 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
ɨgana NOUN 8 obl
peʔ ADP 9 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
amaken VERB 0 root

mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roba VERB 4 xcomp
at AUX 4 aux
towɨya VERB 0 root

opábe NOUN 3 compound
cú ADJ 1 amod
cigá NOUN 0 root

apəy NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 4 aux
topaba VERB 0 root
mɨy ADV 4 advmod
mãm PART 4 discourse

nãn PRON 4 obl
mihmãm ADP 1 case
ekab AUX 4 aux
eyaʔwara VERB 0 root

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 mark

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
coke PART 3 advmod

kõm ADV 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
iʔkɨy PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

tuŋnoʔ NOUN 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 0 root
aʔnãn AUX 1 cop
igã PART 1 discourse

maʔwɨt NOUN 0 root
cú ADJ 1 amod

war PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 0 root
rab PART 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
baʔpiktem ADJ 2 advmod

tanaká NOUN 2 compound
peon NOUN 0 root

aʔcey NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
yat PART 1 mark

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
ŋa PRON 1 clf
para ADJ 1 amod
ŋa PRON 1 clf

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
cára VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
aʔkay AUX 2 aux

iyãy NOUN 0 root
gap ADJ 1 clf

kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔtoʔ ADJ 1 clf

oti VERB 0 root
gán PART 1 dep

Noep PROPN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

aʔtóy VERB 0 root

wayo NOUN 2 compound
naká NOUN 0 root
bap PART 1 clf

owakán VERB 0 root
aʔkəy PRON 1 obl

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
téy VERB 0 root

aʔken VERB 0 root
pə PART 1 discourse
menə PART 1 discourse

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
roy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 3 clf

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
paraʔkət VERB 0 root

ibeon NOUN 0 root
meʔ ADJ 1 clf
kĩn ADJ 1 amod
meʔ ADJ 1 clf

cibekonnoʔ NOUN 0 root

iyõm NOUN 0 root
ŋõm ADP 1 case

mõm VERB 0 root
aʔwaʔye AUX 1 aux
[péŋ NOUN 5 nsubj
manẽ ADJ 3 amod
ya VERB 1 dep
kanãp] SCONJ 5 mark

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 4 obj
tap PART 2 case
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
cúrem ADV 4 advmod

owaʔpan VERB 0 root
aʔpẽya VERB 1 xcomp
gán PART 1 dep

ipá NOUN 0 root
gáʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ĩriŋ NOUN 3 obj
macéri VERB 0 root
gán PART 3 dep

ei NOUN 2 compound
nãk NOUN 0 root
káʔ ADJ 2 clf
cú NOUN 2 amod
gáʔ ADJ 2 clf

ŋaramãya VERB 0 root

icapop NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

wayo NOUN 2 compound
nak NOUN 0 root
pap ADJ 2 clf
cú ADJ 2 amod
bap ADJ 2 clf

kanãy ADV 4 advmod
yét PRON 3 nmod
péŋ NOUN 4 nsubj
[ʔet] AUX 0 root

aʔken VERB 0 root

cãn NOUN 2 obj
meʔŋen VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root

yét PRON 2 nmod
maʔpəy NOUN 4 obj
bat ADJ 2 amod
toba VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 4 appos

pattem ADJ 4 amod
cúrem ADJ 1 conj
wat PRON 4 nmod
owe NOUN 0 root
tap PART 4 case

owaraʔkət VERB 0 root

kõm ADV 3 advmod
aʔcat NOUN 3 obj
menə PART 0 root

tuy VERB 6 obl
Babesáya PROPN 6 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
ʔet AUX 6 aux
yate NOUN 6 obj
taʔwara VERB 0 root

at PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
makãri NOUN 4 obj
rakət VERB 0 root

[õn PRON 4 nsubj
iʔke] PART 1 advmod
mãygãra NOUN 4 obj
roy VERB 0 root

maʔɨp NOUN 0 root
cakot ADJ 1 amod

yate NOUN 2 nmod
gap NOUN 0 root

ameko NOUN 2 nmod
ʔora NOUN 0 root

karo NOUN 2 nmod
nãg NOUN 0 root
aʔ ADJ 1 clf

taptoba VERB 0 root
kaʔto PRON 1 appos

cãn NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

aʔkun NOUN 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
ip NOUN 3 nmod
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
kanã PART 3 dep

wat PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 4 nmod
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
pɨk=toʔ NOUN 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
aʔ=to VERB 2 advcl
kanãp SCONJ 3 mark

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
nakira NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔpəy NOUN 6 nsubj
rap PART 1 case
pat ADJ 1 amod
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
ikérat VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔpɨy VERB 0 root
gahmõmnem ADV 2 advmod

õn PRON 4 nsubj
er PRON 3 nmod
iyõm NOUN 4 obj
noy VERB 0 root
matet ADV 4 obl

karokérara VERB 0 root

maʔwɨr NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
pewit NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 3 punct
ŋaat PRON 6 nmod
pewit NOUN 3 appos
koãm PART 6 mark

owakán VERB 0 root
matet ADV 1 advmod
wat PRON 4 nmod
iyõm NOUN 1 obl
pihmãm ADP 4 case

pattem ADJ 0 root
maʔpəy NOUN 1 nsubj

war PRON 2 nmod
icɨ NOUN 3 obj
ʔara VERB 0 root
okay AUX 3 aux
co PART 3 mark

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
okera VERB 0 root

ayaʔwan VERB 0 root
topə PART 1 discourse
nãnin PART 1 discourse

mɨrɨrɨy NOUN 2 nsubj
imatẽran VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 advmod
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

taykit PART 3 advmod
péŋ NOUN 3 nsubj
ekɨga VERB 0 root

tẽna ADV 5 advmod
iʔke PART 5 advmod
maʔpəy NOUN 5 nsubj
icɨ NOUN 5 obj
arap VERB 0 root

cán NOUN 0 root
nãʔ ADJ 1 clf

iyõm NOUN 0 root
mãt ADJ 1 amod

nãm NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

aʔwét VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 1 case

kanãy ADV 3 advmod
iʔkap AUX 3 aux
aʔwĩa VERB 0 root

at PRON 2 nsubj
otoy VERB 0 root

ip NOUN 2 obj
ʔɨya VERB 0 root
aʔkay AUX 2 aux
yahmãm PART 2 advmod

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ŋa PRON 3 obj
tati VERB 0 root
ẽn PRON 5 nsubj
ŋato VERB 3 dep
nãt SCONJ 5 mark
wa AUX 5 aux

móa NOUN 4 obj
rokõna ADP 4 mark
ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ibeʔtɨn VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 4 mark

at PRON 2 nsubj
ecapét VERB 0 root
ahyə PART 2 mark

pattem ADJ 3 advmod
ahyə PART 3 mark
ekerap VERB 0 root

ŋit VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 1 aux
aʔkay AUX 1 aux
yahmãm PART 1 advmod

ameko NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔkɨgat VERB 0 root
tpu VERB 2 obl
toʔwa AUX 2 aux

õn PRON 4 nsubj
wat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
raken VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

were NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

maʔwit NOUN 4 nsubj
tah PART 1 case
mõm ADV 1 advmod
wɨy VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔaʔ PART 3 clf

tokera VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
igã PART 1 discourse

maʔpəy NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 7 nsubj
ŋa PRON 1 clf
ʔet AUX 7 aux
at PRON 5 nmod
chapéu NOUN 7 obj
káʔ ADJ 5 clf
tiga VERB 0 root
menə PART 7 mark

kɨgomət PRON 7 dep
ĩyá NOUN 7 dep
naká NOUN 2 compound
mã ADP 2 case
at PRON 7 nsubj
yate NOUN 7 obj
wĩm VERB 0 root

kaʔmep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
(aʔkəy) ADP 1 obj

at AUX 0 root

oken VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

õn PRON 2 nsubj
omãmnoy VERB 0 root

naʔcap NOUN 0 root
yatep ADJ 1 amod

at PRON 3 nsubj
mãygãra NOUN 3 obj
wĩn VERB 0 root
igã PART 3 mark

Kokõ PROPN 0 root
rap PART 1 case

owicorop ADJ 2 xcomp
ken VERB 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 4 nsubj
bat ADJ 1 amod
óra NOUN 4 compound
wɨy VERB 0 root

kɨganapət ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
at PRON 4 nsubj
etop VERB 0 root

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
yaʔwan VERB 0 root
ŋapik PRON 2 obl

wat PRON 0 root
tap PART 1 case

wagag NOUN 2 nmod
naká NOUN 0 root

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PART 1 case
icɨ NOUN 0 root

kahyep VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
aʔkəy ADP 1 obj

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
nãnin PART 2 discourse
coke PART 2 discourse

õn PRON 3 nsubj
ameko NOUN 3 obj
toy VERB 0 root

onaká NOUN 2 obj
yakoy VERB 0 root
wenwen VERB 2 xcomp
kanãp ADV 3 advmod
cúrem ADV 3 advmod

õn PRON 5 nsubj
maʔwɨt NOUN 4 nmod
at PART 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 5 obj
toy VERB 0 root

wat PRON 2 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 nsubj
ŋa PRON 2 clf
kət VERB 0 root
yat PART 4 mark
iʔke PART 4 advmod
menə PART 4 mark

owagon PRON 2 nsubj
oyakay VERB 0 root
tokõna ADP 2 case

opábeʔ NOUN 0 root
, PUNCT 1 punct
epábeʔ NOUN 1 conj
koãm PART 3 mark

kõm ADV 4 advmod
ahyə PART 1 discourse
mãygãra NOUN 4 nsubj
etóp VERB 0 root

aoro NOUN 2 nmod
cagá NOUN 0 root

boi NOUN 3 nsubj
ʔet AUX 3 aux
towaʔpara VERB 0 root
towewĩa VERB 3 conj

cárarem ADJ 0 root
õn PRON 1 nsubj

maʔteg NOUN 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod

ʔittem ADJ 3 advmod
õn PRON 3 nsubj
aʔtop VERB 0 root

õn PRON 3 nsubj
yaracewag NOUN 3 obj
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 3 cop

wayo NOUN 2 compound
yogá NOUN 0 root
beʔ ADJ 2 clf
cára ADJ 2 amod
beʔ ADJ 2 clf

abeʔnan VERB 0 root

agóaʔpət NOUN 2 nsubj
amagahmõm VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 2 cop

at PRON 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔa ADJ 2 clf
peʔ ADP 2 case
iʔke PART 2 advmod
wep AUX 7 aux
aʔtoba VERB 2 ccomp

cĩm NOUN 2 obj
ʔoa VERB 0 root
okay AUX 2 aux
cak ADV 2 obl
mam X 2 dep

nãn AUX 3 nsubj
ikap AUX 3 aux
púŋpúŋ VERB 0 root
toʔwa AUX 3 aux

õn PRON 2 nsubj
ŋabean VERB 0 root
ya SCONJ 5 mark
ŋa PRON 5 nsubj
oyaʔti VERB 2 dep
nãn AUX 5 cop

wayo NOUN 2 nmod
biru NOUN 0 root

púŋ VERB 0 root
wet AUX 1 aux
péŋ NOUN 1 obj
kəy ADP 1 case

maʔpəy NOUN 0 root
pat ADJ 1 amod
ŋanãn AUX 1 cop

nãya NOUN 3 compound
gap ADJ 1 clf
peʔwap NOUN 0 root
paʔpik ADJ 3 amod
kap ADJ 3 clf

at PRON 2 nmod
tágɨp NOUN 0 root

ŋa PRON 4 nsubj
toat PRON 3 nmod
owẽ NOUN 4 obj
tanogat VERB 0 root

õn PRON 2 nsubj
aʔtoy VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 2 advmod
at PRON 5 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 2 obl
ʔa ADJ 5 clf
peʔ ADP 5 case

ẽn PRON 4 nsubj
ekera VERB 4 xcomp
kanã PART 2 mark
yaʔti VERB 0 root
nãn AUX 4 cop
ahyə PART 4 mark

owakán VERB 0 root
iʔke PART 1 advmod
ekəy ADP 1 obl

taraptem ADV 2 advmod
õn PRON 0 root
okõna ADP 2 case

at PRON 2 nsubj
aʔwĩn VERB 0 root
pə PART 2 advmod

abaʔpan VERB 0 root

ẽn PRON 3 nsubj
yaw NOUN 3 obj
rati VERB 0 root

amãn NOUN 4 nsubj
yat PART 4 mark
nãnin PART 4 discourse
tə PART 0 root

cat NOUN 3 compound
pap ADJ 1 clf
cakɨ NOUN 0 root

ip NOUN 4 nsubj
tokõna ADP 1 mark
õn PRON 4 nsubj
yɨy VERB 0 root

ʔiriŋ NOUN 2 obj
nakəga VERB 0 root

nãn PRON 0 root
ahyə PART 1 discourse

mẽt ADV 3 advmod
wep AUX 3 aux
púŋ VERB 0 root
wa AUX 3 aux

maʔpəy NOUN 3 nmod
at PRON 1 nmod
manikap NOUN 0 root

opábe NOUN 2 compound
cigá NOUN 0 root

icap NOUN 0 root
pɨʔ ADJ 1 clf
cára ADJ 1 amod
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf

õn PRON 3 nsubj
iʔke PART 1 advmod
iket VERB 0 root

mõm VERB 0 root
at AUX 1 aux
okəy ADP 1 obj

maʔwɨt NOUN 2 nsubj
ken VERB 0 root

karam NOUN 2 nmod
yogá NOUN 0 root
bɨʔ ADJ 1 clf