Imaʔuhez VERB 0 root
katu ADV 1 advmod
wira NOUN 1 nsubj
hu NOUN 3 nmod
. PUNCT 1 punct

Maʔe PRON 4 nsubj
Zuze PROPN 3 nmod
hemireko NOUN 4 nmod
her NOUN 0 root
. PUNCT 4 punct

Wenu VERB 0 root
wiwi PART 1 discourse
maʔe NOUN 4 nmod
ipuipuhaw NOUN 1 obj
pino NOUN 4 nmod
rehe ADP 5 case
har ADV 5 advmod
. PUNCT 1 punct

Tuweharupi NOUN 2 obl
uzuka VERB 0 root
kateteaʔu ADV 2 advmod
wiràmiri NOUN 2 nsubj
aʔepe PRON 2 obl
. PUNCT 2 punct

Hete VERB 0 root
katu ADV 1 advmod
Karipe PROPN 1 obl
aʔe DET 3 discourse
no PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uʔu VERB 0 root
pixàn NOUN 1 nsubj
aguza NOUN 1 obj
paw PRON 1 obl
rupi ADP 4 case
aʔe PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Nezewe ADV 8 advmod
zekaipo ADV 4 advmod
amo DET 4 det
zawar NOUN 8 nsubj
uhu NOUN 4 nmod
aʔe PART 4 discourse
, PUNCT 4 punct
imaʔuhez VERB 0 root
zekaipo ADV 8 advmod
iko AUX 8 aux
aʔe PART 8 discourse
. PUNCT 8 punct

Aze SCONJ 3 mark
zekaipo ADV 3 advmod
uixe VERB 5 advcl
oho VERB 5 dep
uhem VERB 0 root
zeiakpo ADV 5 advmod
amo DET 8 det
tawpe NOUN 5 obl
. PUNCT 5 punct

Ikatu VERB 0 root
ahɨ ADV 1 advmod
zapepo NOUN 1 nsubj
aʔe PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Hehɨ NOUN 2 nsubj
umur VERB 0 root
maʔe NOUN 4 nmod
roʔokwer NOUN 2 obj
hawe PRON 2 obl
. PUNCT 2 punct

Aha VERB 0 root
putar ADV 1 advmod
kope NOUN 1 obl

Uwagaw VERB 0 root
ipɨ NOUN 1 obj
zekaipo ADV 1 advmod
uʔɨw NOUN 2 nmod
wanehe ADP 1 obl
, PUNCT 1 punct
nomomorkwaw VERB 1 conj
imono VERB 7 dep
wanupe ADP 7 obl
rihi PART 7 discourse
. PUNCT 7 punct

Uzuka VERB 0 root
Mari PROPN 1 nsubj
zanu NOUN 1 obj
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uwewe VERB 0 root
oho VERB 1 dep
kaʔape NOUN 1 obl
wa PART 1 discourse
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Umeʔegatu VERB 0 root
zekaipo ADV 1 advmod
wanehe ADP 1 obl
, PUNCT 1 punct
umaʔenukaw VERB 1 conj
zekaipo ADV 5 advmod
wɨkɨʔɨr NOUN 8 nmod
zeʔegwer NOUN 5 obl
rehe ADP 8 case
uzeupe ADP 8 iobj
. PUNCT 8 punct

Amo DET 2 det
itukaz NOUN 4 obl
rehe ADP 2 case
nàpɨtàʔi NUM 0 root
kwaw ADV 4 advmod
wiràmiri NOUN 4 nsubj
aʔe PART 4 discourse
wà PART 4 discourse
. PUNCT 4 punct

Naʔe PART 3 discourse
Zuze PROPN 3 nsubj
oho VERB 0 root
tawpe NOUN 3 obl
aʔe PART 3 discourse
kurɨ PART 3 discourse
. PUNCT 3 punct

Uxiʔu VERB 0 root
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
nan ADV 5 advmod
kwehe ADV 7 advmod
tete ADV 5 advmod
uzuka VERB 1 parataxis
. PUNCT 7 punct

Uwewe VERB 0 root
pɨpɨ NOUN 1 nsubj
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
rupi ADP 3 case
ɨwɨ NOUN 1 obl
ʔaromo ADP 5 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uʔu VERB 5 ccomp
awaxi NOUN 1 obj
aʔe PRON 1 nsubj
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 5 nsubj
izupe ADP 5 iobj
. PUNCT 5 punct

Wexak VERB 0 root
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Upɨhɨk VERB 0 root
imuwà AUX 1 aux
aʔe PART 1 discourse
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
wetɨk VERB 1 parataxis
imono VERB 6 dep
kaʔape NOUN 6 obl
no PART 6 discourse
. PUNCT 6 punct

Wexak VERB 0 root
Fábio PROPN 1 nsubj
Márcia PROPN 1 obj

Uhem VERB 0 root
oho VERB 1 dep
aʔe DET 6 det
zawar NOUN 5 nmod
iziwàpɨrer NOUN 6 nmod
tupawpe NOUN 1 obl
wà PART 1 discourse
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
teko NOUN 13 obl
romo ADP 10 case
zekaipo ADV 13 advmod
uwuz VERB 1 conj
kurɨ PART 13 discourse
, PUNCT 13 punct
iʔi VERB 1 conj
maizupe NOUN 16 obl
, PUNCT 16 punct
hekatu VERB 23 ccomp
tànàʔàg ADV 19 advmod
kurɨ PART 19 discourse
tɨ PART 19 discourse
iʔi VERB 16 conj
izupe ADP 23 iobj
. PUNCT 23 punct

Uhɨape VERB 0 root
katu ADV 1 advmod
zahɨ NOUN 1 nsubj
aʔepe PRON 1 obl
izupe ADP 1 obl
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uzekok VERB 0 root
ɨwɨok NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 2 case

Taritɨkaʔi ADV 2 advmod
uwewe VERB 0 root
arar NOUN 2 nsubj
awa NOUN 2 obl
waʔaromo ADP 4 case
aʔe PART 2 discourse
wa PART 2 discourse
. PUNCT 2 punct

Umeʔe VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 3 nmod
reimaw NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 3 case
, PUNCT 6 punct
zapukaz NOUN 3 appos
aʔɨr NOUN 6 nmod
rehe ADP 6 case
. PUNCT 6 punct

Wexak VERB 0 root
akuxi NOUN 1 obj
aʔɨr NOUN 2 nmod
ikwar NOUN 1 obl
pupe ADP 4 case

Heàkàg NOUN 2 nsubj
ahɨ VERB 5 ccomp
ʔɨ PART 2 discourse
, PUNCT 2 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
umemɨrpe NOUN 5 obl
. PUNCT 5 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
kaʔapiʔi NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 2 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Pe NOUN 3 obl
rupi ADP 1 case
wata VERB 7 advcl
mehe ADV 3 mark
wà PART 3 discourse
, PUNCT 3 punct
wenu VERB 0 root
taz NOUN 7 obj
ahu NOUN 8 nmod
wà PART 7 discourse
. PUNCT 7 punct

Arar NOUN 2 nsubj
upɨta VERB 0 root
kaʔape NOUN 2 obl
wa PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 2 punct

Wekar VERB 0 root
teko NOUN 1 nsubj
wakari NOUN 1 obj
ita NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 4 case

Uhem VERB 0 root
oho VERB 1 dep
aʔepe PRON 1 obl
wà PART 1 discourse
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
tuaʔu NOUN 8 nsubj
iʔi VERB 1 conj
tɨkɨʔɨrpe NOUN 8 obl
eziwà VERB 13 ccomp
neno PART 10 discourse
tɨ PART 10 discourse
iʔi VERB 8 conj
izupe ADP 13 iobj

Aha VERB 5 ccomp
putar ADV 1 advmod
haikwer ADP 1 obl
romo ADP 3 case
iʔi VERB 0 root
zekaipo ADV 5 advmod
izupe ADP 5 iobj
. PUNCT 5 punct

Pɨhaw NOUN 2 obl
heta VERB 0 root
teteaʔu ADV 4 advmod
miar NOUN 2 obl
izupe ADP 4 case
kaʔape NOUN 2 obl
. PUNCT 2 punct

Wexak VERB 0 root
amo DET 3 det
awa NOUN 1 obj
aʔepe PRON 1 obl

Weraha VERB 0 root
wekohawpe NOUN 1 obl
wà PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uzuka VERB 0 root
mukaw NOUN 1 obl
pupe ADP 2 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Ikatu VERB 0 root
ahɨ ADV 1 advmod
Karipe PROPN 1 obl
iʔu VERB 1 advcl
mehe ADV 4 mark
no PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Ur VERB 0 root
wira NOUN 1 nsubj
hu NOUN 2 nmod
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
wi ADP 4 case
aʔe PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
Zuze PROPN 9 nmod
rekohawpe NOUN 1 obl
aʔe PART 9 discourse
. PUNCT 9 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
hoko NOUN 1 nsubj
kaʔape NOUN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
rupi ADP 2 case
pe NOUN 1 obl
rupi ADP 4 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Opor VERB 0 root
pixàn NOUN 1 nsubj
oho VERB 1 dep
hehe ADP 1 obl
, PUNCT 1 punct
upɨhɨk VERB 1 parataxis
no PART 6 discourse
. PUNCT 6 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
umaʔe NOUN 3 obj
iputukapa VERB 1 advcl
aʔe PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Amirikur NOUN 2 nsubj
umumaw VERB 0 root
maʔe NOUN 2 nsubj
ʔa NOUN 3 nmod
kwer PART 3 advmod
aʔe DET 1 discourse
wà PART 1 discourse

Wexak VERB 0 root
xu NOUN 1 obj
pe NOUN 4 nmod
iwɨrhar ADP 1 obl
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Epɨhɨk VERB 5 ccomp
mukaw NOUN 1 obj
tɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
upe NOUN 5 obl
, PUNCT 8 punct
hewowopa VERB 5 advcl
. PUNCT 8 punct

Ipuipu VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 1 nsubj
kaʔa NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 3 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Pakuri NOUN 0 root
ruʔu PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Umuixe VERB 0 root
kar ADV 1 advmod
inemuʔi NOUN 1 obj
aguz NOUN 1 obl
apɨgwar NOUN 4 nmod
rupi ADP 4 case

Umeʔe VERB 0 root
Mari PROPN 1 nsubj
pino NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 3 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Ikatu VERB 4 ccomp
ʔɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
umenpe NOUN 4 obl
. PUNCT 4 punct

Upɨhɨk VERB 0 root
hoko NOUN 1 nsubj
ipira NOUN 1 obj
uxi NOUN 1 obl
pupe ADP 4 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uʔu VERB 0 root
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uhɨape VERB 0 root
zahɨ NOUN 1 nsubj
aʔepe PRON 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Arapuha NOUN 2 nsubj
ipu VERB 5 advcl
mehe ADP 2 case
, PUNCT 2 punct
upɨhɨk VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 5 nsubj
umukaw NOUN 5 obj
. PUNCT 5 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
putar ADV 1 advmod
uhɨ NOUN 1 obl
rupi ADP 3 case
umaʔe NOUN 6 obj
iputukapa VERB 1 advcl
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Taʔe SCONJ 2 mark
amàno VERB 7 ccomp
eteaʔi ADV 2 advmod
ihe PRON 2 nsubj
xe PART 2 discourse
, PUNCT 2 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
muaʔu ADV 7 advmod
zekaipo ADV 7 advmod
wanupe ADP 7 iobj
. PUNCT 7 punct

Hete VERB 0 root
katu ADV 1 advmod
nànà NOUN 1 obj
Zuzepe PROPN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Agwer DET 2 det
maʔe NOUN 4 nsubj
aʔɨr NOUN 2 compound
uʔu VERB 0 root
kaʔapiʔi NOUN 4 obj

Aʔe DET 3 det
Tentehar NOUN 3 nmod
tɨkɨʔɨr NOUN 5 nsubj
maizu NOUN 3 flat
umumeʔu VERB 0 root
parupi PRON 8 obl
maʔe NOUN 8 nmod
uzeapomaʔe NOUN 5 obj
izupe ADP 8 iobj
. PUNCT 5 punct

Uhem VERB 0 root
pino NOUN 1 obl
wi ADP 2 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Zapukaz NOUN 2 nsubj
uʔu VERB 0 root
awaxi NOUN 2 obj
aʔe PART 2 discourse
no PART 2 discourse
. PUNCT 2 punct

Kwa PART 2 discourse
namono VERB 0 root
wer ADV 2 advmod
kwaw ADV 2 advmod
zepe PART 2 discourse
herukaz NOUN 2 obl
rehe ADP 6 case
newe ADP 2 obl
tɨ PART 2 discourse
, PUNCT 12 punct
taʔe CCONJ 12 mark
reta VERB 2 ccomp
amo DET 14 det
maʔe NOUN 12 nsubj
aʔepe PRON 12 obl
wà PART 12 discourse
xe PART 12 discourse
. PUNCT 12 punct

Umàno VERB 0 root
putar ADV 1 advmod
ruʔu PART 1 discourse
aipo PART 1 discourse

Ɨrɨhupe NOUN 3 obl
, PUNCT 1 punct
heta VERB 0 root
teteaʔu ADV 3 advmod
ipira NOUN 3 nsubj
. PUNCT 3 punct

Ezapo VERB 0 root
arapuk NOUN 1 obj
wiràmiripe NOUN 1 obl
nehe PART 1 discourse

Oʔok VERB 0 root
kara NOUN 1 obj
teteaʔu ADV 2 advmod
. PUNCT 1 punct

Tueharupi NOUN 2 obl
upɨta VERB 0 root
uhɨ NOUN 2 obl
ipɨr ADP 3 case
. PUNCT 2 punct

Taz NOUN 0 root
ahu NOUN 1 nmod
ruʔu PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Awakwer NOUN 2 nsubj
oho VERB 0 root
kope NOUN 2 obl
wà PART 1 discourse

Imaʔuhez VERB 0 root
wira NOUN 1 nsubj
hu NOUN 2 nmod
. PUNCT 1 punct

Ikwar VERB 5 advcl
mehe ADV 1 mark
, PUNCT 1 punct
kwaxi NOUN 5 nsubj
uxiʔu VERB 0 root
ikwà NOUN 5 obl
rehe ADP 6 case
. PUNCT 5 punct

Izipɨ NOUN 5 obl
mehe ADP 1 case
Tentehar PROPN 5 nsubj
wazegarhaw NOUN 5 nmod
herurawer NOUN 0 root

Aʔe DET 2 det
maʔe NOUN 4 nmod
ʔɨw NOUN 2 compound
iʔa NOUN 0 root
ʔar NOUN 4 obl
katu ADV 5 discourse
mehe ADP 5 case

Ikatuahɨ VERB 0 root
kwaxi NOUN 1 nsubj
kwarerpe NOUN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Aʔepe PRON 2 obl
uwexak VERB 0 root
zekaipo ADV 2 advmod
amo DET 5 det
mainumɨ NOUN 9 nmod
we PART 5 discourse
zepe PART 5 discourse
tentehar NOUN 9 nmod
tuaʔu NOUN 2 obj
zepe PART 9 discourse
zekaipo ADV 10 advmod
raʔa PART 2 discourse

zapukaz NOUN 3 nsubj
aʔɨr NOUN 1 nmod
heiheihem VERB 5 ccomp
, PUNCT 3 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
uzeupe ADP 5 iobj
. PUNCT 5 punct

Amo DET 2 det
ʔar NOUN 5 obl
mehe ADP 2 case
Zuze PROPN 5 nsubj
upɨhɨk VERB 0 root
kwaxi NOUN 5 obj
heruwà VERB 5 advcl
kaʔa NOUN 7 obl
wi ADP 8 case
aʔe PART 7 discourse
, PUNCT 5 punct
kwarerpe NOUN 13 obl
imonopa VERB 5 advcl
aʔe PART 13 discourse
. PUNCT 13 punct

Weraha VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 1 nsubj
taz NOUN 1 obj
ahu NOUN 3 nmod
wekohawpe NOUN 1 obl
aʔe PART 1 discourse
no PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Ukwaw VERB 0 root
pixàn NOUN 1 nsubj
aguza NOUN 4 nsubj
waneta NOUN 1 obj
haw ADV 4 advmod
Zuze PROPN 7 nmod
ràpuz NOUN 1 obl
me ADP 7 case
aʔe PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Emur VERB 7 ccomp
muhàg NOUN 1 obj
ihewe ADP 1 obl
rihi PART 1 discourse
ʔɨ PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
izupe ADP 7 iobj
. PUNCT 7 punct

Heta VERB 0 root
nànà NOUN 1 nsubj
Zuze PROPN 4 nmod
kope NOUN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uriʔahɨ VERB 0 root
zekaipo ADV 1 advmod
izupehar NOUN 1 obj
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Hoko NOUN 2 nmod
ixi NOUN 3 nsubj
ipukuaʔu VERB 0 root
. PUNCT 3 punct

Ikatu VERB 0 root
ahɨ ADV 1 advmod
kwarahɨ NOUN 1 nsubj
Maripe PROPN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Mari PROPN 2 nmod
imemɨr NOUN 5 nsubj
aʔe DET 2 discourse
, PUNCT 5 punct
Kari PROPN 0 root
her NOUN 5 obl
romo ADP 6 case
aʔe DET 5 discourse
. PUNCT 5 punct

Uhɨk VERB 0 root
hokope NOUN 1 obl
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Naʔe PART 3 discourse
Maizu PROPN 3 nsubj
iziwà VERB 0 root
uiwɨrɨ NOUN 5 nmod
hetekwer NOUN 3 obj
ikwapar NOUN 3 obl
ʔɨmaz ADV 6 advmod
. PUNCT 3 punct

Amo PRON 2 nsubj
uzuka VERB 0 root
miar NOUN 2 obj
kaʔape NOUN 2 obl
? PUNCT 2 punct

Tɨwɨr NOUN 2 nmod
tukaz NOUN 4 obl
rehe ADP 2 case
nahetatetekwaw VERB 0 root
wiràmiri NOUN 4 nsubj
izupe ADP 4 obl
aʔepe PRON 4 obl
. PUNCT 4 punct

wɨra NOUN 0 root
ʔohaw NOUN 1 nmod
, PUNCT 4 punct
kokumu NOUN 2 list
wakwaztaw NOUN 4 nmod
, PUNCT 4 punct
wàhuhaw NOUN 2 list
, PUNCT 7 punct
kwàtàzgwerai NOUN 10 nmod
wawɨra NOUN 2 list
ʔohaw NOUN 10 nmod
, PUNCT 10 punct
upuwipuwir NOUN 15 nmod
kwer PART 13 advmod
wazimuàir NOUN 2 list
haw ADV 15 advmod
, PUNCT 15 punct
paze NOUN 20 nmod
maʔe ADV 20 nmod
wazeʔagaw NOUN 2 list
paw DET 20 det
haw ADV 20 advmod
, PUNCT 20 punct
zegar NOUN 2 list
aiwpaw NOUN 24 nmod

Hete VERB 0 root
katu ADV 1 advmod
kara NOUN 1 nsubj
Zuze PROPN 5 nmod
ihɨpe NOUN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Zaha VERB 6 ccomp
kope NOUN 1 obl
kara NOUN 1 obl
ipiaromo ADP 3 case
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 6 nsubj
Maripe PROPN 6 obl
. PUNCT 6 punct

Ama NOUN 2 nsubj
kɨr VERB 5 advcl
mehe ADV 2 mark
, PUNCT 5 punct
heta VERB 0 root
toʔotoʔom NOUN 5 nsubj
teteaʔu ADV 6 advmod
aʔepe PRON 5 obl
, PUNCT 10 punct
ʔɨpe NOUN 8 appos
. PUNCT 10 punct

Werur VERB 0 root
zapepo NOUN 1 obj
wemirekope NOUN 1 obl
, PUNCT 5 punct
Maripe PROPN 3 appos
. PUNCT 5 punct

Uzapi VERB 0 root
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Mari PROPN 2 nsubj
oho VERB 0 root
zapepo NOUN 2 obl
ipiaromo ADP 3 case
. PUNCT 2 punct

Wekar VERB 0 root
wemiʔuràm NOUN 1 obj
iko AUX 1 aux
. PUNCT 1 punct

Oho VERB 0 root
maʔe NOUN 1 obl
putɨr NOUN 2 nmod
rehe ADP 2 case
, PUNCT 6 punct
mururu NOUN 3 appos
rehe ADP 6 case
. PUNCT 6 punct

xapat NOUN 2 nmod
xigmaʔe NOUN 3 obj
umeʔeg VERB 0 root
kar ADV 3 advmod
no PART 3 discourse
. PUNCT 3 punct

Wiko VERB 0 root
Zuàw PROPN 1 nsubj
awa NOUN 1 obl
zutɨkaʔi NOUN 3 nmod
romo ADP 3 case
aʔe DET 2 discourse

Heta VERB 0 root
xu NOUN 1 nsubj
kaʔape NOUN 1 obl
. PUNCT 1 punct

Awaxi NOUN 0 root
ruʔu PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Uzuka VERB 4 advcl
Purutu PROPN 4 nsubj
tapiʔir NOUN 1 obj
ur VERB 0 root

Azapo VERB 7 ccomp
uken NOUN 1 obj
uhu NOUN 2 nmod
zumen NOUN 1 obl
wi ADP 3 case
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
izupe ADP 7 iobj
. PUNCT 7 punct

Upɨhɨk VERB 0 root
wira NOUN 1 nsubj
hu NOUN 2 nmod
aʔe PART 1 discourse
, PUNCT 1 punct
uʔu VERB 1 conj
heraha VERB 6 advcl
wɨraka NOUN 7 obl
rehe ADP 8 case
kurɨ PART 6 discourse
. PUNCT 6 punct

Uhem VERB 0 root
toʔoʔtoʔom NOUN 1 obl
me ADP 2 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Werur VERB 0 root
naʔiruz NUM 3 nmod
nànà NOUN 1 obj
. PUNCT 1 punct

Maʔe NOUN 4 obj
te PART 1 discourse
awa NOUN 4 nsubj
uzuka VERB 0 root
kaʔape NOUN 4 obl
? PUNCT 4 punct

Mari PROPN 2 nsubj
ukwaw VERB 0 root
imunar VERB 2 advcl
mehe ADV 3 mark
. PUNCT 2 punct

Iàkàg NOUN 2 nsubj
ahɨ VERB 0 root
tue PART 2 discourse
no PART 2 discourse
. PUNCT 2 punct

Aexak VERB 7 ccomp
xapat NOUN 3 nmod
ikatuahɨmaʔe NOUN 1 obj
tawpe NOUN 1 obl
ihe PRON 1 nsubj
, PUNCT 1 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
izupe ADP 7 iobj
. PUNCT 7 punct

Maʔe NOUN 2 nmod
imumeʔu NOUN 4 nmod
haw ADV 2 advmod
izepɨmehe NOUN 15 obl
akwez DET 6 det
zawar NOUN 7 nmod
wazewenugar NOUN 15 nsubj
wà PART 7 discourse
, PUNCT 7 punct
hàir NOUN 11 nmod
maʔeputɨr NOUN 15 obj
rehe ADP 11 case
arer ADV 11 advmod
zekaipo ADV 15 advmod
umuiʔe VERB 0 root
wàiko AUX 15 aux
wà PART 15 discourse
, PUNCT 15 punct
aʔe PRON 20 nmod
hàiràgaw NOUN 21 nmod
paràm NOUN 15 obl
aʔe PART 21 discourse
. PUNCT 21 punct

Upuranu VERB 0 root
tuaʔu NOUN 1 obl
hehe ADP 2 case
: PUNCT 1 punct

Mo PRON 2 nsubj
oho VERB 0 root
ɨrɨhupe NOUN 2 obl
. PUNCT 2 punct

Amo DET 2 det
awa NOUN 9 nsubj
aʔe PART 2 discourse
, PUNCT 6 punct
Zuze PROPN 6 nmod
tu NOUN 2 appos
aʔe PART 6 discourse
, PUNCT 6 punct
uputar VERB 0 root
awaxi NOUN 12 nmod
Zuze PROPN 12 nmod
kopehar NOUN 9 obj
aʔe PART 9 discourse
. PUNCT 9 punct

Uzewɨr VERB 0 root
Zuze PROPN 1 nsubj
wa PART 1 discourse
amo DET 6 det
ae ADV 4 advmod
pe NOUN 1 obl
rupi ADP 6 case
. PUNCT 1 punct

Wiko VERB 0 root
aʔepe PRON 1 obl

Umeʔe VERB 0 root
hoko NOUN 1 nsubj
iko AUX 1 aux
ipira NOUN 1 obl
rehe ADP 4 case
kurɨ PART 1 discourse
. PUNCT 1 punct

Amo DET 2 det
ʔar NOUN 7 obl
mehe ADP 2 case
pɨhaw NOUN 7 obl
, PUNCT 7 punct
pixàn NOUN 7 nsubj
wetun VERB 0 root
aguza NOUN 7 obj
aʔe PART 7 discourse
kurɨ PART 7 discourse
. PUNCT 7 punct

Maʔe PRON 7 ccomp
tue PART 1 discourse
te PART 1 discourse
aipo PART 1 discourse
ma ADV 4 advmod
, PUNCT 7 punct
iʔi VERB 0 root
uzeupe ADP 7 iobj
. PUNCT 7 punct